AAM AADMI PARTY DELHI ELECTION MANIFESTO 2013 SUMMARY 1. WHY VOTE FOR THE ‘AAM AADMI PARTY’? Elections happen every five years, but a chance to change the country is a rare occurrence. The upcoming Delhi elections, to be held on the 4th of December, present one such unique opportunity. This is not merely an opportunity to change the party in power in Delhi, this is a moment to transform the politics of India. The possibility of Swaraj is knocking at doors of Delhi. If this electoral battle is won in Delhi, it would open the whole country to the winds of change. You hold the key to the future of this country... The announcement of elections is accompanied by the rituals that have come to define today’s electoral politics. Ruling parties make untruthful and exaggerated claims. Election manifestoes are released, which are a collection of false promises; both the readers and the writers of these documents are aware of the untruthfulness and the insignificance of these promises. In these elections, there is not one, but two ruling parties. While Congress has been holding the reins of the Delhi government for 15 years, BJP has been in power in the MCD for the past 7 years. Both parties are hand-in-glove and share the fruits of power. The result lies before you/ The Aam Aadmi Party is not just another party. It is a party that has arisen from the struggles of Ramlila Maidan and Jantar Mantar. It is a party that is not here merely to fight elections, it is here to change the rules of the game. It is here to rewrite the politics of this country, it is here to transform the relationship between the government and the people, it here to make the government truly ‘of the people’. It is a party that brings with it the perspective of the common women and men of this country; it is a party that wants to bring power back into the hands of the people. 2. BRINGING AN END TO CORRUPTION IN DELHI 2.1 Delhi Jan Lokpal Bill The Aam Aadmi Party is committed to the passing the Delhi Jan Lokpal Bill within 15 days of coming to power. This would model the Lokayukta along the lines of the Jan Lokpal Bill. The provisions of this law include: i. All public officials (including the Chief Minister, Ministers and MLAs) shall fall within the purview of the investigation of the Lokayukta ii. Any public official found guilty of corruption would be removed from their jobs, sent to prison and their property confiscated iii. Time bound investigation and punishment in cases of corruption iv. v. vi. vii. 2.2 2.3 2.4 Lokayukta would have the power to initiate investigations and prosecution against those with charges of corruption; would have administrative, fiscal and investigative autonomy. Citizens’ charter would be introduced, and any officer found exceeding time limits would be fined Whistleblowers would be given protection Honest officials like Ashok Khemka and Durga Shakti Nagpal would be encouraged and protected. Introduction of the Swaraj Bill, to devolve power directly to the people; this would curb corruption at the local level Simplification of government procedures, as complex procedure promote corrupt practices Use of information technology to ensure transparency in government functioning 3. DEVOLVING POWER DIRECTLY TO THE PEOPLE 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 Every Mohalla Sabha would be given untied funds for developmental activities in their area. The Mohallas Sabha would decide where this money would be spent. Payment for any government work would be made only when the Mohalla Sabha is satisfied with the work done Mohalla Sabhas would directly make decisions about parks, street lights, local streets of the area Mohalla Sabhas would be authorised to cancel the licence of the PDS distributors, and grants new licences Mohalla Sabhas would have the autonomy to formulate any schemes from the funds devolved to them All certificates (such a birth, death, caste, income certificates, etc) of people in the locality would be issues by the Mohalla Sabha secretariat. The decision to establish or shut down an alcohol store in the locality would be taken by the Mohalla Sabha. Mohalla Sabhas would monitor the local government school and primary health centre Beneficiaries of any government schemes would be decided by the Mohalla Sabha. 4. FULL STATEHOOD TO DELHI The elected government of Delhi does not have powers that are held by all other state governments. The Aam Aadmi Party would struggle to get full statehood for Delhi, so that: 4.1 4.2 4.3 D.D.A. comes under the authority of the Delhi government, which can take decisions regarding establishing new colonies, regularisation of unauthorised colonies, etc Police and ‘law and order’ should be in the control of the Delhi government M.C.D should be free from the control of the Central Government. 5. ELECTRICITY BILLS TO BE REDUCED BY HALF Delhi’s consumers have been getting inflated bills due to malpractices by Discoms. AAP promises a reduction of consumers’ electricity expenditure by 50%. This would be brought about by the following measures: 5.1 5.2 5.3 The government would order an audit of the electricity distribution companies. Licenses would be cancelled for any company that refuses to have its accounts audited. Inflated bills would be recitified. Electricity meters would be checked by independent agancies. If they are found to be running too fast, the companies would have to compensate the consumer. Additionally, the government would take the following steps to improve the electricity supply: 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 End the ‘raid-raj’ of electricity discoms. Withdraw cases against those who participated in the AAP civil disobedience of non-payment of electricity bills Incentives and subsidies to promote solar energy; target of meeting 20% of Delhi’s electricity needs via solar energy in the next ten years. Individuals installing solar panels in their houses would be allowed to sell extra electricity to the grid. Discom monopolies would be ended and consumers would be allowed to choose between two electricity providers. Discoms would be brought under RTI and their accounts made more transparent. 6. CLEAN WATER IN EVERY HOME Water is the biggest concern of the aam aadmi in Delhi, as more than 50 lakh people do not get piped water in their homes. The Aam Aadmi Party would take the following steps to resolve this concern: 6.1 6.2 6.3 6.4 6.5 6.6 6.7 6.8 AAP’s first priority would be to ensure that every house in Delhi gets clean water Clamping down on Delhi’s powerful tanker mafia, and prosecuting the political leaders who protect and promote them. Restructuring Delhi Jal Board (DJB) to clamp down on its rampant corruption. Bringing transparency into Delhi Jal Board’s water supply arrangements, and getting adequate data on incoming and outgoing water supply: i. Installing bulk water meters to get data on how much water comes to Delhi, from which of its sources ii. Installing bulk meters on raw water enterning entering Water Treatment Plants iii. Installing bulk meters in each of Delhi’s 21 water zones to know how much water was sent to which zone every day. This information would be available everyday on the DJB website. Providing water from Sonia Vihar water treatment plant to areas like Sangam Vihar, Deoli, Ambedkar Nagar, Mehrauli, Vasant Vihar and Vasant Kunj. Begin the use of the Munak canal and use it to supply water to Dwarka, Bawana, Okhla and other water shortage areas in west Delhi. Currently, the DJB does not supply water to the supposedly ‘unlawful’ habitation in Delhi (like slums, unauthorised colonies, etc) ensuring their dependence on the tanker mafia. DJB will take responsibility to supply water to each house in Delhi Water laboratories to be opened in each district in Delhi to check contamination of water. 6.9 6.10 6.11 6.12 6.13 Mohalla Sabhas to play a role in the local distribution of water. AAP opposes the privatisation of the DJB, and re-affirm its commitment to the state’s responsibility to provide clean water in every home in Delhi Domestic consumers who have got inflated bills (up to November 2013), will not be liable to pay these bills. Families that use up to 700 litres of water per day would be provided free water. Any household using a greater amount of water would pay the entire bill amount. High rates would be charged for any household using more than 1000 litres of water per day. Repeal the recently passed law that automatically increases water rates every year. Given Delhi’s increasing population and absence of its own source of water, there is a need to evolve longterm and sustainable water policies. These would include: 6.14 6.15 6.16 Incentives and subsidies for recycling of waste-water from kitchens and bathrooms. Utilising Delhi’s abundant rainwater by systematic city-wide rainwater harvesting policies. Reviving Delhi’s water bodies (like lakes, baolis, etc) by ensuring their recharging by rainwater; maintaining them in partnership with local communities 7. MAKING SEWERAGE SYSTEMS WORK, BUILDING COMMUNITY TOILETS 7.1 7.2 7.3 AAP is committed to building 2,00,000 public/community toilets in Delhi, whose maintenance would be monitored by Mohalla Sabhas One-fourth of the city is not connected to the sewage network; AAP is committed to connecting all houses to the sewage network, irrespective of the nature of the settlement. Areas with new sewers would have redesigned sewage systems to be decentralised with local treatment of waste water. Delhi Jal Board has virtually no statistics on the amount of sewage generated in the city. In the absence of appropriate data, sewage treatment capacity falls woefully short and untreated sewage pollutes the water of Delhi. AAP would take the following steps to rectify this situation: i. Bulk sewage meters to be installed in each locality to get accurate data on amount of sewage generated. ii. Based on this data, building appropriate number of new, decentralised sewage treatment plants. iii. Incentives and subsidies for recycling of water from kitchens and bathrooms iv. Environmentally-friendly methods of treating sewage would be promoted. 8. BETTER WASTE MANAGEMENT, A CLEANER DELHI 8.1. 8.2. 8.3. 8.4. Mohalla Sabhas would be given complete authority and funds for waste management and cleaning of their localities Littering or disposal of construction debris in public places would be heavily fined. Effective implementation of the ban on plastics bags Segregation of bio-degradable and non-biodegradable waste at the household level. 9. HIGH QUALITY EDUCATION IN GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS AND COLLEGES 9.1. 9.2. 9.3. 9.4. 9.5. 9.6. 9.7. 9.8. 9.9. 9.10. 9.11. 9.12. Aam Aadmi Party is committed to the provision of high quality education to every child in Delhi, irrespective of their ability to pay. Towards this end it shall make all possible efforts to substantially improve the standard of education in government schools, and bring them on par with high quality private schools. At least 500 new schools would be opened. Adequate facilities would be provided for all students and teachers in government schools; this would include enough classrooms, drinking water, separate toilets for boys and girls, etc. More crèches (anganwadis) would be opened for children under 6-years of age. Teachers will be appointed on all vacant posts in Delhi’s schools. Government schools and crèches would be monitored by an ‘Abhibhaavak Sabha’, an open assembly of all the parents of the children who study in that school. New law would be introduced to control profiteering by private schools and colleges; this would regulate fees and clamp down on ‘donation’ demands by private education institutions. Introducing child-friendly pedagogy and ethics-based education, instead of learning by rote. New colleges to be started specifically for students from Delhi. Improving facilities and expanding Delhi government’s universities, such as Ambedkar University. Contractualisation of teaching jobs (in both government and private institutions) would be stopped, and all posts regularised. Regulation of teachers’ salaries in private schools. Attempts would be made to roll back the 4-year Undergraduate Program (FYUP), which has been undemocratically introduced in Delhi University. No schools shall refuse admission to Children with Disability. 10. IMPROVING PUBLIC HEALTHCARE FACILITIES 10.1. 10.2. 10.3. 10.4. 10.5. 10.6. 10.7. 10.8. 10.9. Government health care facilities would be improved (and made as good as private hospitals) so that all citizens of Delhi – rich or poor – have access to high quality health care. New government hospitals would be opened to ensure Delhi conforms to the international norm of 5 beds for every thousand people. Bring to completion the several half-built hospitals in Delhi. New primary health centres would be established, these would be monitored by local Mohalla Sabhas. Improving and upgrading facilities in government hospitals to bring them on par with high quality private hospitals. There are 40% vacancies in doctors posts, and 20% in those of medical staff. These would immediately be filled Private hospitals built on land granted by the government would be made to fulfil their commitments towards public healthcare. Homeopathy, Ayurveda, Unani, Naturopathy and other alternative systems of medicine would be promoted by the government and would play an important role in the public healthcare system. Generic medicines would be promoted in Delhi. Large percentage of diseases in Delhi are caused by polluted air, contaminated water and improper waste disposal; AAP would work on controlling these for a long-term solution. 10.10. 10.11. Management and monitoring of dispensaries and primary hospitals would be done by Mohalla Sabhas. A special task force would work on a war-footing to control dengue in Delhi. 11. SECURITY FOR WOMEN , CHILDREN AND SENIOR CITIZENS Delhi has the highest rate of kidnappings and rapes amongst all cities in India. Aam Aadmi Party shall work towards evolving both long-term and short-term solutions for this. Since the Delhi Police is not under the government’s control AAP would pressurise the central government to: 11.1. 11.2. 11.3. Ensure that all FIR’s are registered by the police. CCTV cameras are installed in the FIR registration rooms to monitor whether the police is registering all FIRs Implement all the provisions suggested by the report of Verma Committee. The Delhi government would take the following steps to ensure the safety of it’s citizens: 11.4. 11.5. 11.6. 11.7. 11.8. 11.9. A Citizens’ Security Force would be formed with a branch in each ward, which would provide security to anyone in distress, with special focus on security of women, children and senior citizens. Ensuring swift dispensing of justice in cases of crimes against women by establishing special fast track courts. Ensuring lighting and security provisions on roads, parks, buses and all public spaces. Increasing number of well-located and safe Working Women’s Hostels and shelters for homeless women. Ensuring implementation of laws (like Juvenile Justice Act, POCSO Act) for security of children. Honouring of all police and security martyrs from Delhi, who sacrifice their live providing security to the citizens of our country; their families to be given Rs. 1 crore in their memory. 12. SWIFT AND FAIR DISPENSATION OF JUSTICE 12.1. 12.2. 12.3. 12.4. Establishing new courts in Delhi and appointment of judges; running courts in two shifts, if needed Ensure no adjournments are made in cases where the Delhi Government is a litigant Special courts would temporarily be set-up to dispense cases that are pending in lower courts. Proceedings of all court cases would be video-recorded and made available to ordinary citizens. 13. DEVOLUTION OF POWER TO GRAMS SABHAS AND BETTER FACILITIES IN DELHI’S VILLAGES 13.1. 13.2. 13.3. 13.4. 13.5. Decisions regarding the development of Delhi’s villages to made by the local Gram Sabhas, which would be granteduntied funds to utilise according to their priorities. No land to be acquired in Delhi’s villages without the consent of the Gram Sabha Central government would be pressurised to remove unnecessary restrictions regarding land use in villages. Power to extend boundaries of ‘lal dora’ would be given to Gram Sabhas Compensation would be given for land that has been acquired by DDA, but not compensation not granted Efforts would be made to give security of tenure to landless farmers who have been given lands on leasehold. 13.6. 13.7. 13.8. 13.9. 13.10. 13.11. Improve bus services to Delhi’s villages Substantial shortage of schools in Delhi’s villages; increase number of schools and colleges. Increase number of hospitals based on the population living in rural areas in Delhi Farmers would be provided agricultural subsidies Veterinary hospitals would be made for animals Provide better sports’ facilities, as Delhi’s villagers have been home to international-level sports persons 14. BETTER FACILITIES AND REGULARISATION OF UNAUTHORISED COLONIES 14.1. 14.2. 14.3. 14.4. Unauthorised colonies would be regularised within one year; this would be at the rates announced in the notification of March 24, 2008; residents would be given ownership rights. Unauthorised colonies come up with protection of the police and political leaders; any such efforts would be strongly clamped down upon in the future. Mohalla Sabhas would play a central role in the process of regularisations, and the planning and supervision of public work in these colonies. Long-term policies to ensure availability of low-cost housing, to prevent the mushrooming of unauthorised settlements 15. BETTER FACILITIES AND REHABILITATION OF SLUMS 15.1. 15.2. 15.3. Efforts would be made to rehabilitate slum dwellers by giving them flats/plots, where their slums are located. In case in situ rehabilitation is not possible, slums dwellers would be relocated to the nearest possible location where proper provision of public services is possible. The long-term housing policy would ensure that low-cost housing is available in large numbers, to prevent slums from coming up in the future. Till appropriate rehabilitation of slum dwellers is done, no slums will be demolished. Till then the following steps would be taken: 15.4. 15.5. 15.6. Repairing of local streets in slums Adequate provision of community toilets to ensure the health and safety of women; these would be maintained by the local Mohalla Sabha. Slums shall provided with public services such adequate supply of water, waste management and sewerage networks. 16. PROTECTING THE COMMON MAN FROM RISING PRICES 16.1. 16.2. 16.3. 16.4. 16.5. Electricity bills would be halved and 700 litres water would be provided free. Clamp-down on hoarding and profiteering that increases commodity prices. Regulating the fees of private schools; providing high quality education in government schools Improving public healthcare system, so that all common people have access to high quality healthcare irrespective of their ability to pay. Corruption is a significant factor behind rising prices; this shall be brought under control by passing the Delhi Jan Lokpal Bill. 16.6. 16.7. Black economy is a major factor behind rising prices, and election funding is the nadir of this black economy. AAP seeks to present an alternative on how elections can be fought with clean money. The Public Distribution System (PDS) is a way to protect the common people from rising prices, but corruption is rampant in this system. PDS shops would be monitored by Mohalla Sabhas, rations will not be replaced by cash transfers and pulses and oils would be added to the PDS. 17. INCREASING EMPLOYMENT IN DELHI 17.1. 17.2. 17.3. 17.4. 17.5. 17.6. 17.7. Vacant posts would be filled in all departments of Delhi government; new schools and hospitals would be established. Improving facilities in Delhi’s industrial areas and facilitating growth of industrial enterprised to generate more employment in Delhi. Promote vocation education; establish large number of vocational training institutes in Delhi Young entrepreneurs would be provided loans at low interest rates. Ending contractual jobs and regularisation of all government and private jobs. Facilitating greater trade within Delhi by having trader-friendly policies. Providing space and security to street vendors. 18. FACILITATING TRADE IN DELHI 18.1. 18.2. 18.3. Simplifying VAT and other tax structure of Delhi, to ease tax compliance by traders Policies to facilities the revival of wholesale trade in Delhi AAP government will not allow Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in Retail in Delhi 19. IMPROVING FACILITIES IN INDUSTRIAL AREAS 19.1. 19.2. 19.3. Providing better facilities – like roads, water, electricity – in Delhi’s Industrial Areas. Streamlining rules and regulations for running and establishing industry. Simplifying licensing procedures Providing training and low-interest loans to young entrepreneurs wanting to set up industries 20. NO CONTRACTUALISATION OF JOBS AAP strongly opposes the recent trend of contractualisation of both government and private job and will take the following steps to end this exploitation: 20.1. 20.2. 20.3. 20.4. 20.5. No contractual employment would be allowed against posts that require work to be done all-year round; jobs would be regularised and made permanent. Contractual labour would continue in temporary work like construction; efforts would be made to improve working conditions of workers employed contractually. Ensuring strict implementation of minimum wages Restructuring the Labout Department to ensure greater transparency and accountability; ensuring strict adherence to labour laws Pressurising the Central government to changing labour-unfriendly provisions of the Contract Labour Act (1970). 20. SOCIAL SECURITY FOR UNORGANISED SECTOR WORKERS 86% people working in Delhi are in the unorganised sector. These include constructions workers, domestics workers, security guards, rag-pickers, street vendors, etc. The Aam Aadmi Party shall ensure minimum wages and regulate their working hours, weekly holidays and working conditions. Provision of social security shall be initiated along the lines of the Construction Workers’ Welfare Board. 22. LICENCES AND PERMANENT SPACES TO STREET VENDORS 22.1. 22.2. Licenses would be given to street vendors by the local Mohalla Sabhas. Fixed spaces would be allotted for local markets and street vendors by local Mohalla Sabhas. 23. CONVINIENT AND INEXPENSIVE PUBLIC TRANSPORT 23.1. 23.2. 23.3. 23.4. 23.5. 23.6. 23.7. 23.8. Holistic transport policies to be formulated for all forms of transport such are metro, buses, autos, rickshaws and cycles; for this purpose a ‘Unified Transport Authorty’ would be established. Large scale expansion of bus services in Delhi Resolution of all legitimate grievances of DTC employees Secure and reliable last mile connectivity from bus and metro services to be introduced via feeder services, shared autos, e-eickshaws and rickshaws. Route rationalisation to done for all these modes of transport and unnecessary restrictions to be removed. Clamping down on the rampant corruption in the Transport Department Extending and developing the Ring Rail service in collaboration with Indian railways Large-scale expansion of Delhi metro Concessional rates on buses and the metro for senior citizens, students and persons with disability 24. IMPROVED ROADS, WITH SPACE FOR NON-MOTORISED TRANSPORT 24.1. 24.2. 24.3. Multi-storeyed parking facilities to made in busy and congestion localities. Local streets to be maintained by Mohalla Sabhas Pavements for pedestrians shall be made on every possible road. Unnecessary restrictions would be removed for rickshaws and adequate rickshaw stands made. Special corridors to be made for cyclists. 25. FAIR ARRANGEMENTS FOR AUTO-DRIVERS AND AUTO-COMMUTERS 25.1. 25.2. 25.3. 25.4. 25.5. 25.6. Large number of auto-rickshaw stands to be made in Delhi Facilitating bank loans for purchasing of auto-rickshaws; as well as streamlining purchase without ‘waiting’ and ‘black markets’. Clampdown on corrupt practices and demands for bribes by the Transport Department. Prosecution of those engaging in illegal practices in auto-rickshaw financing. Preventing harassment of auto-rickshaw drivers by the police. Ongoing revision of auto-rickshaw fares; introduction of waiting charges. Preventing misuse of Sections 66/192A 26. YAMUNA: ENDING POLLUTION AND ENCROACHMENT 26.1. 26.2. 26.3. Connection all localities and houses to the sewerage network and ensuring that no untreated sewage would enter the Yamuna. Establishing numerous Effluent Treatment Plants to ensure no untreated, toxic effluent flows into the Yamuna. Preventing further encroachment and construction on the Yamuna river bed. 27. REDUCING POLLUTION, SAVING THE RIDGE 27.1. 27.2. 27.3. Delhi Ridge is the lungs of the city; they would be protected from encroachment and deforestation. Afforestation would be done in all parts of Delhi in collaboration with local Mohall Sabhas. Stray animals live in inhuman conditions; the Animal Welfare Board would be enhanced from its ‘advisory’ status to policy-making and enforcing department. Delhi is one of the world’s most polluted cities. Public transports would be improved to reduce the number of cars on the road; incentives would be given to low-pollution fuels like CNG. 28. PROTECTING CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS OF SCHEDULED CASTES 28.1. 28.2. 28.3. 28.4. Ensuring use of S.C. component plan for the welfare of Scheduled Castes Ensuring implementation of SC, ST and OBC reservation in Delhi government jobs. Zero- or low-interest loans for entrepreneurs from Scheduled Castes. Simplifying procedures for being issued caste certificates 29. LIFE OF DIGNITY TO THE VALMIKI COMMUNITY 29.1. 29.2. 29.3. 29.4. Many members of the Valmiki community work as ‘safai karamcharis’; AAP will end contractualisation in safai karamchari posts. Provide educational opportunities by improving government schools and colleges. Provide livelihood opportunities to Valmiki youth to help them find employment in fields other than those of safai karamcharis. Protective gear and insurance for workers who enter sewage drains 30. PEACE, JUSTICE AND EQUALITY FOR MUSLIMS 30.1. 30.2. 30.3. 30.4. 30.5. 30.6. Ensure that fake encounters and false cases against Muslim youth shall end. Improve condition of government schools as poor Muslims send their children to government schools. Provide true second language status to Urdu Provide economic security to those Muslims engaged in small scale enterprises Bring transparency in the functioning of Delhi Waqf Board Resolve the issue of land for graveyards 31. JUSTICE TO VICTIMS OF 1984 MASSACRE 31.1. 31.2. All efforts would be made to bring justice to victims of the 1984 Sikh massacre Many victims of the massacre live in colonies like Tilak Vihar that lack adequate facilities like roads, sewers. Infrastructure would be developed in these areas. 32. TRUE SECOND LANGUAGE STATUS TO URDU AND PUNJABI 32.1. 32.2. 32.3. 32.4. 32.5. Implement second-language status given to Urdu and Punjabi Adequate teachers to be employed for teaching Urdu and Punjabi Teaching and research in Urdu and Punjabi in Delhi state universities Encourage study and research in Sanskrit Support all minority languages in Delhi 33. PROTECTING THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITY 33.1. 33.2. 33.3. 33.4. Enhance the definition of disability Help Children with Disability get admission into schools and colleges Establish new institutions for protecting the rights of persons with disability Make public buildings accessible and barrier-free 34. OTHER MARGINALISED COMMUNITIES 34.1. 34.2. Take steps to end discrimination against nomadic (NT/DNT) communities Ensure that the trans-gender community gets access to education and healthcare; protected from harassment by the police. 35. SPORTS AND CULTURE 35.1. 35.2. 35.3. 35.4. 35.5. 35.6. Opening a public library in each Vidhan Sabha constitutency in Delhi Make museums more accessible and interesting Improve sports facilities for boys and girls in all wards in Delhi Bring all Sports Authorities in Delhi undr the RTI and Lokayukta. Sports facilities built for the Commonwealth Games to be made available for sports persons in Delhi Recreation Centre for senior citizens in each Mohalla/Ward
