Aam Aadmi Party A-119, Kaushambi, Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh-201010. Phone: 09718500606 www.aamaadmiparty.org | Email: contact@aamaadmiparty.org | Facebook: AamAadmiParty | Twitter: @AamAadmiParty Table of Contents 1. Why vote for Aam Aadmi Party? 0... cccccccccssseceseseeeseseeeeessseeeessseeecsseeeesseeeessaaees 03 SWARAJ Bringing an end to Corruption Devolving Power Directly to the People Providing Swift, Accessible Justice to the Common Man..................cceeesseeeeeeees Ensuring Accountable, Humane Policing Free and Fair Elections, Improving Representation................ 0... cceeeesteeeee seen eee EDUCATION AND HEALTH 7. Health: Universal Access to all Citizens 8. Education for All ECONOMY AND ECOLOGY 9. Facilitating Robust Economic Growth with Holistic Well-being.............. eee eee 10. Creating Decent Jobs and Gainful Employment for our Youth.............. 0c eee 11. Simplify Rules, Create Accountable Institutions, Curb Black Economy 12. Promoting Honest Business, Unleashing Entrepreneurial Energy......................4. 13. Empowering Citizens, particularly the Poor and Vulnerable 14. Reinvigorating the Rural Economy 15. Improving Farmers' Livelihood 16. Environment and Natural Resources Policy 17. No Contractualisation of Jobs 18. Social Security for the Unorganised Sector 19. Protecting the Common Man from Rising Prices SOCIAL JUSTICE 20. Gender Justice 21. Ending Caste-based Inequalities 22. Life Of Dignity to the Valmiki Community 23. Secularism and Communal Harmony 24. Security and Non-discrimination towards Muslims 25. Adivasis: Taking Charge of Their Own Development 26. Empowerment of Persons with Disability 27. Nomadic and De-notified Tribes 28. Animal Welfare SPORTS, CULTURE AND MEDIA 29. Sports and Culture 30. Media Policy NATIONAL SECURITY 31. Defence Policy 32. Foreign Policy 33. Internal Security 1. Why vote for Aam Aadmi Party? Indian democracy stands at a cross-roads. Sixty-five years after Independence, the promise of Swaraj is yet to be redeemed. Democracy has been reduced to a tiresome routine that involves electing the rulers once in five years, while being subject to indifference and indignity at the hands of politicians and bureaucrats in between. Political parties are not mechanisms for finding and airing people's voices; all of them have become election machines. These machines are designed to catch voters and use them as fodders to convert money into power and power back into more money. At best these parties hold out an illusory promise of “Good Governance’, but that is no substitute for self-government. Swaraj was never merely liberation from the colonial rule. Swaraj promised nothing short of self-rule: people's control over their destiny, power to decide on matters concerning their well-being, to direct the apparatus of power and hold rulers accountable. Swaraj is about rule by the people, not by netas or babus. Millions of martyrs including Mahatma Gandhi, Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose, Bhagat Singh, Afshaq Ullah, Chandra Shekhar Azad, Ram Prasad Bismil, Mangal Pandey, sacrificed their lives to free the nation. Did they sacrifice their lives so that our own people should plunder the country instead of the British? These gallant freedom fighters envisaged an India that is described in the preamble of our Constitution. WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to constitute India into a SOVEREIGN, SOCIALIST, SECULAR, DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC and to secure to all its citizens: JUSTICE, social, economic and political; LIBERTY, of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; and to promote among them all FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the Nation; IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twenty-sixth day of November, 1949, DO HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION. This preamble depicts our dream, the dream of ordinary Indians. This is a dream of democracy, social justice, secularism and of sovereign India. The preamble of the constitution promises a just society. It is a promise of liberty, equality and brotherhood. And yet this promise has not been fulfilled. Today India faces three serious threats: corruption, communalism and crony capitalism. These threats are destroying the fabric of this country and the life of the aam aadmi. The people of India need to come together to solve these problems. The Aam Aadmi Party is committed to ensuring that political power is returned to the hands of the people of India, that policies are made in consultation with and in the interests of the aam aadmi, so that ordinary Indian citizens can fight these threats. The Aam Aadmi Party is not just another party. It is a party that has arisen from the struggles of Ramlila Maidan and Jantar Mantar. This party is not here merely to fight elections, it is here to change the rules of the game. It is here to rewrite the politics of this country, it is here to transform the relationship between the government and the people, it here to make the government truly 'of the people’. It is a party that brings with it the perspective of the common women and men of this country. It is not a party that says it will solve all your problems. It is a party that wants Swaraj; that wants power to return to your hands, so that you can solve your own problems. Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 SWARAJ 2. Bringing an End to Corruption ii. iii. iv. Jan Lokpal Bill The Jan Lokpal was conceived as an independent empowered and accountable Ombudsman which could independently, credibly and expeditiously investigate corruption offences of all public servants. While the UPA government ostensibly passed a Lokpal Bill, this is a toothless bill, which would not be able to effectively combat corruption. The AAP is committed to bringing in a strong anti-graft legislation, the Jan Lokpal Bill. The provisions of this Bill will include: ~ All public officials (including the Prime Minister, Union Ministers and MPs) of the Union Government shall fall within the purview of the investigation of the Lokpal. Public officials of the Union Governmentt will be required to furnish an annual declaration of assets. Any undeclared assets will be liable for confiscation. ~ Any public official found guilty of corruption would be removed from their position and sentenced to prison. Their property will be confiscated. ~> Time bound investigation and trial will be introduced in cases of corruption. > The Lokpal will have the power to initiate investigations and prosecution against those charged with corruption. The organization will have administrative, fiscal and investigative autonomy. The CBI will be brought under the administrative control of the Lokpal, so that the investigating machinery can be made independent of the government. > Citizens' charter would be introduced in all Union government offices. This charter will include a set time-limit for different types of services that govt officials provide to citizens. Grievance redressal mechanisms will be introduced and any violation of the Citizen's Charter will be fined. > Whistleblowers will be provided protection and rewarded for their contribution towards creating ajust system. Swaraj Bill Aam Aadmi Party would legislate the Swaraj Bill which would devolve power to Gram Sabhas and Mohalla Sabhas, and thereby curb corruption at the local level. Details on the Swaraj Bill are in the following sections. Simplification of Government Procedure Most government procedures are unnecessarily complex and provide opportunities for corruption. There will be a serious effort to simplify all governmental procedures. Use of Information Technology We will promote the use of information technology to promote transparency and reduce corruption in government functioning. Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 3. Swaraj: Devolving Power Directly to the People Aam Aadmi Party is contesting elections not merely to form the government but to fundamentally transform the system of governance. We believe that decision-making power resides with the people and should be exercised directly by them. In our vision of Swaraj, every citizen of India would be able to participate in decisions that affect their lives. People will make the decisions and elected representatives would implement them. Bringing to life this vision of Swaraj requires the devolution of effective decision-making powers to Grams Sabhas and Mohalla Sabhas. We will enact the Swaraj Bill, with the following provisions: i. Every Gram Sabha and Mohalla Sabha would be given untied funds every year for developmental activities in their area, which they can use according to their own needs and priorities. The Gram Sabha (or Mohalla Sabha) would decide how and where the funds would be utilized — for instance, laying a particular road, repairs at a school, opening a dispensary, rainwater harvesting and so on. ii. Payment for any government work would be made only when the Gram Sabha (or Mohalla Sabha) is satisfied with the work done. iii. When irregularities and malpractice are found in a local ration shop, the Gram Sabha (or Mohalla Sabha) would be authorized to cancel the license of the distributor and grant license to anew distributor. iv. Gram Sabha (or Mohalla Sabha) would have the autonomy to formulate any schemes for their locality from the funds devolved to them. v. All certificates (such a birth, death, caste, income certificates, etc) of people in the village or urban locality would be issued at the Gram Sabha (or Mohalla Sabha) secretariat. People would not need to pay bribes at the S.D.M's office for such basic services. vi. Gram Sabhas (or Mohalla Sabhas) would have the right to decide ifa liquor shop can be opened in their village/mohalla. They would also have the authority to shut down a liquor shop in the village/mohalla. Any Gram Sabha (or Mohalla Sabha) taking such a decision would have a minimum quorum of 50% women. vii. Gram Sabhas(or Mohalla Sabhas) would monitor and supervise the functioning of the local government school and primary health centre. vill. The list of beneficiaries of government schemes such as widow pensions, old-age pensions and so on, would be prepared by the Gram Sabha (or Mohalla Sabha). ix. Quorum in the Gram Sabha (or Mohalla Sabha) would not be only numerical but based on the presence of minimum members from marginalized groups. Creation of the institution of a Social Justice Ombudsman to ensure that the functioning and decisions of the Gram Sabha (or Mohalla Sabha) is within the legal and constitutional framework and does not discriminate against any group or community. x. Ina few years, when the functioning of Gram Sabha (or Mohalla Sabha) becomes well- established, we envisage their participation in the process of legislation. A list of subjects would be made on which consultation of Gram Sabhas would be mandatory. They would also be given powers to initiate legislation which would have to be considered by State Assemblies and the Parliament Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 4, Providing Swift, Accessible Justice to the Common Man AAP is firmly committed to ensuring that a common citizen has access to a quick, fair, affordable and accountable justice system. Some of the key issues facing the current judicial system are a) Inaccessibility of justice for the common citizen due to procedural complexities and physical distances from courts and judicial structures; b) Extreme de/ays in the dispensation of justice; c) Poor infrastructure, poor human resources and rent seeking behaviour; and d) Lack of sensitivity, elitist mindset and an absence of understanding of acommon man's problems by the judges. Towards this end AAP will i. Institute adequate number of Gram Nyayalayas which will consist of simple procedures. While the 2008 Act introduced this concept, Gram Nyayalayas have not been made an effective means of dispensation of justice. AAP is committed to ensuring that these will take care of petty cases that affect common people ina speedy manner. ii. Simplify procedures (i.e. procedural laws like CPC, CrPC, Evidence Act, Limitation Act) ili. Create Judicial Appointment Commissions (JAC) both at the State and National level to make the selection processes of judges for the lower and higher courts transparent. iv. Make it a mandatory requirement (in line with the underlying Jan Lokpal principle) for declaration and full disclosure of assets of judges, and, as a corollary, the subjection of any undeclared assets to seizure; v. Setup fast track courts at all levels of judiciary. vi. Double the number of courts and judicial strength at sub ordinate level in five years vii. Improve the infrastructure present in courts, including computerization, in order to make them more efficient. o. Ensuring Humane and Accountable Policing Today the common man does not see the police as a provider of security, but as a source of oppression and harassment. Police continues to be a colonial institution fundamentally anti-people in its orientation, an extended arm of the regime and often law unto itself. Principle of Swaraj requires a fundamental orientation to make the police people-friendly. Therefore, police reforms should aim at greater accountability of the police to the people, professionalization and autonomy from political misuse, separation of the powers within the police and better training and humane working conditions for police force. 1. Implementation of the Supreme Court judgement on Police Reforms giving the police greater functional autonomy from the misuse by the political executive. 11. Accountability of the police to the local Gram Sabha (or Mohalla Sabha). li. Separate powers of maintenance of law and order and investigation to two separate wings of the Police. Power of custody to be removed from the police. All custody will be judicial, and any interrogation will be done in judicial custody. iv. Refusal to register an FIR by any police personnel to be made a criminal offence. 06 Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 V1. Vil. Vill. Bring about transparency in police functioning by ensuring that all public interaction areas of a police station are videographed. Interrogation by investigation officers of the accused also to be videographed. Improve working conditions of police personnel by ensuring that working hours of police personnel not be more than 8 hours per day and by putting in place fair, transparent and accessible grievance redressal mechanisms and whistleblower protection mechanisms for police personnel. The use of police personnel as orderlies for domestic work or as security guards by senior police officers will also be abolished. Oppose use of large amount of police forces for VIP security Recruitment of police personnel to be done in a standard and transparent manner to avoid possibility of corruption and favouritism. Institutionalise process of rewards for good work done by police personnel. 6. Free and Fair Elections, Improving Representation While our country has achieved a system of free and fair elections in a minimum sense of the term, the mechanism of political representation does not offer meaningful and substantive choices to the citizens, nor does it provide a level playing field for political competition. We need wide-ranging electoral reforms that would deepen democratic upsurge and are compatible with the model of political Swaraj. Towards this end, Aam Aadmi Party will take the following steps: 1. il. iil. IV. Vi. Vil. Election Commissioners should be appointed by a multi-member constitutional committee rather than the government. The Election Commission to be granted its various powers it has been demanding for its independence including power to frame rules and to check affidavits given by candidates. Role of Black Money should be curbed by strong disclosure norms for political parties, rigorous scrutiny of returns, ceiling on individual contributions and realistic ceiling on overall expenditure. Explore possibilities of State funding of elections. Political parties to be provided equitable access to information and media space. Distortions of the media such as paid news, unlimited media advertisement and misuse of public money for advertising the ruling party to be regulated. Internal functioning of political parties to be regulated to ensure that they follow basic democratic procedures, follow transparency norms under RTI and get their accounts scrutinised by CAG approved auditors. The existing First-Past-the-Post system should be supplemented with Proportional Representation, to improve the representativeness of the electoral system. Provisions of 'Right to Reject' and 'Right to Recall' to be introduced. Bringing down the lower age limit of contesting elections from 25 to 21, to improve the participation of youth in the political processes of the country. Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 HEALTH AND EDUCATION 7. Health: Universal Access to all Citizens India's public health system is in a crisis. A common man does not have access to good quality healthcare facilities, and one serious illness can throw a family into a serious financial crisis. Aam Aadmi Party is firmly committed to ensuring that every citizen of this country has access to high quality healthcare, irrespective of whether they are rich or poor. Towards this AAP will: 1. Introduce a comprehensive legislation 'Right To Healthcare' enabling access to high quality healthcare for all the citizens of the country irrespective of whether they are rich or poor. This would be along the lines of the Right to Education Act. ii. Improve accountability of public health systems towards its users by decentralization of funds, functions and functionaries to the appropriate level of local government. ii. Guarantee that all essential drugs are available on a regular basis to public health facilities and made available free to cost to the people. AAP will incentivize states to adopt a transparent procurement system for bulk procurement of generic drugs. iv. Improve the accountability of Private health providers by making it mandatory for private hospitals to display and observe a charter of patients' rights and to display rates and charges of various services. Ensure that private healthcare subsidised by the government honour their commitment to the aam aadmi. v. AYUSH (Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy) and local health traditions to have a significant role in public healthcare; greater public investment into research into these systems of medicine. Investing in human resources by ensuring that all vacancies are filled at the Primary Health Centres; developing a well-trained cadre of frontline grassroots workers. 8. Education for All India's government school system is in a pitiable condition and the aam aadmi does not have access to high quality education. And it is against this background that AAP — which is committed to the well- being of the last person as the touchstone for our policy and politics — affirms its commitment to ensuring the provision of truly equitable access to all sections of society, irrespective of their ability to pay. Towards this AAP will i. State provision of equitable access to high quality of education for all children (beginning with Early Childhood Care) irrespective of their ability to pay. Strengthening of public education system through adequate budgetary allocation and recruitment and capacity building of teachers and administrators. ii. Special provisions for girls, first-generation learners, students from poor families and socially disadvantaged communities so as to ensure total enrolment, check drop-outs, high quality learning and non-discrimination within schools and access to higher education facilities. iii. Involvement of the local community in the creation of a context-rooted curriculum and management of schools, with accountability of school/teachers to a local body like Gram Sabha or Mohalla Sabha 08 Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 iv. Context Relevant curriculum that is grounded both in the ethos of democracy, secularism, equity and justice as well as India's diverse cultures and ways of life. v. Focus of education system on learning outcomes and not on inputs. Reform DIET, SCERT to focus on learning outcomes. Revamp teacher education system. vi. Adequate numbers of qualified teachers to appointed on a regular basis through a transparent selection process, to be compensated adequately, continuously trained and made accountable. vii. Establishing large numbers of ITIs for vocational training; provide opportunities and incentives to those trained in ITIs to establish their own enterprises. vill. Vocational and academic education to be integrated in the school curriculum. Support and development of vocational degrees in higher education. Greater funds to be committed by the government for public-funded higher education especially on improving the quality of State universities. Effective regulation of private institutions, on fees and quality of education. ix. Establish numerous world-class, public-funded institutions of Higher Education - like IIT, AIIMS, IISER, etc — to ensure that all talented students of the country, irrespective of their background get access to high quality education. x. Link higher education to opportunities for entrepreneurship by setting up incubation centres in institutions of higher education. xi. Roll back the Four Year Undergraduate Program (FYUP), which has been undemocratically introduced in Delhi University. Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 09 ECONOMY AND ECOLOGY Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) envisions a balanced development model for India that fosters a dynamic, equitable and ecologically sustainable economy where... > Every citizen in this country will have access to basic needs like food, housing, education, health care, power, water, toilets and other basic amenities Farmers can prosper and secure their livelihood Youth are assured livelihood and gainful employment Honest entrepreneurship is encouraged and thrives People are empowered and have opportunities to realize their fullest potential Rule of law is enforced without any influence and disputes are resolved swiftly Human and ecological capital are continually enriched 008 8 800 Oo Taxation system based upon simplicity, certainty and transparency ...1na fair policy environment backed by participatory, transparent, and accountable institutions. AAP draws its economic vision from its political beliefs that are rooted in decentralized governance, transparency, accountability, and equity. It believes that India needs to evolve a distinctive development model, given the aspirations of India's citizens and the scale and complexity of its challenges. This model will be continuously refined as AAP involves a growing cross-section of Indians in the policy- making process and incorporates evidence-based learning. AAP believes in an open-minded, holistic approach that is not limited by ideological orthodoxies in both domestic and international economic governance. It is neither Left nor Right and will support every good idea, old or new, if it is in the interest of India. Above all, AAP's economic policy discourse will always be inspired by the Indian Constitution's Directive Principles of State Policy. As on today, a combination of corruption, crony capitalism, bad governance and lack of investment in the productive economy have impacted the growth and development of the India economy. The mainstream political parties that have ruled this country for the last 66 years since independence, do not have any fresh ideas to solve the country's problems. They both represent the same economic agenda of inequitable growth coupled with corrupt and ineffective social spending. Large sums of money are being spent on various social schemes without any accountability and outcomes. The country today looks for an alternative to the current economic policies. AAP will provide such alternative economic agenda. Clean, open and transparent governance is in the heart of AAP's economic agenda. Clean and effective governance is the starting point for long-term sustainable growth in any economy. Aam Aadmi Party believes in economic development that is equitable and sustainable. AAP is against the current policies of crony capitalism which have brought the country to its knees, and we will take all steps to eliminate crony capitalism. As a country, we should focus on achieving growth and expansion of the economy which can create millions of jobs as well as generate resources to fund the social obligations of the government. Job creation shall be the primary objective of the economic policies of AAP, and to this end we will promote honest businesses and entrepreneurs. Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 9, Facilitating robust economic growth with holistic well-being AAP's policies seek to place India on a sustainable, equitable, globally competitive, and high-growth trajectory. AAP believes that a dynamic, robust economy cannot be sustained by a fragile and inequitable society. Therefore, AAP's idea of development is in harmony with the needs, skills, resources, and aspirations of the common man. 1. AAP's policies aim to empower every citizen to attain the highest level of fulfilment across the hierarchy of needs: from roti, kapda and makan to security, dignity and personal potential. ii. Integrating economic and environmental policies, to render them increasingly consistent over time; in maximizing the well being today, without compromising the ability of future generations to do so. iii. Creating world-class infrastructure, in both urban and rural areas, for ensuring a dynamic economy; participation of private sector in infrastructure development. 10. Creating Decent Jobs and Gainful Employment for our Youth Apart from the alarming existing unemployment and underemployment levels across age groups, India has over 12 million new youth seeking jobs every year. i. AAPis committed to tapping India's demographic dividend through economic policies that focus on creating decent employment and livelihood opportunities for young women and men in honest enterprises across agricultural, manufacturing, or services sector. i. AAP seeks to afford greater opportunities for lifelong learning and skilling leveraging technology so as to encourage both continued individual and national growth. i11. Focus onjob creation by promoting honest enterprise; this would be done by reducing corruption and streamlining the system of excessive regulations and licenses. 11. Simplify Rules, Create Accountable Institutions, Curb Black Economy AAP favours an efficient, accountable, and transparent government that ensures an appropriate and timely implementation of its policies and conducts regular review of its performance. The vested interests in the country have tried to keep the systems and processes so complex that change becomes difficult. India loses lakhs of crores every year due to corruption in provision of public services. With the high cost of compliance, license-raj, lack of transparency and accountability and unwarranted delays, businesses either are unable to take off or even if they do survive, their productivity barely increases and the number of employees actually ends up decreasing over time. To improve this situation, AAP will: Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 il. ill. 1V. Vi. Simplify rules and regulations, ensure effective administration of law, enforce the rule of law and deliver justice swiftly, encourage honest compliance and punish heavily the defaulters. Ensure the return of "Black Money' stashed in foreign banks to India; time-bound and stringent action against those found guilty of stashing black money. Curtail the wide-spread use of black money in real estate and property dealings. Move towards a simple, progressive and stable tax structure. Aim to increase tax to GDP ratio by enforcing better compliance. No more routine tax amnesty programs and stringent measures to recover taxes from evaders. Use technology and e-governance to extensively administer all government services 12. Promoting Honest Business, Unleashing India's Entrepreneurial Energy The scale of sustainable growth and livelihood creation for which India aspires cannot be met unless we tap into the irrepressible Indian entrepreneurial spirit. We believe that most businesses are honest, but the current environment does not let them flourish. i. il. iil. 1V. AAP will create an eco-system where every enterprising citizen or community has access to capital, information, and infrastructure, such that innovative and productive entrepreneurship becomes the new engine for accelerating growth in our country. AAP believes that government should not be in the business of running businesses. Active participation of private sector is required for enterprises to thrive and create jobs. The government should encourage honest enterprise through lower compliance costs and a corruption-free environment, the provision of efficient and reliable infrastructure and services, and incentivizing productive innovation. Focus on clean, open and transparent governance, which will create a level playing field for honest businesses to thrive and succeed on their own merits. AAP's policies will aim to foster healthy competition in the market economy and curb monopolistic and anti-competitive practices. 13. Empowering citizens, particularly the poor and vulnerable AAP believes that through the empowerment of the citizens of India, the government's development efforts can be both better-directed and amplified manifold. AAP will recall the face of the poorest and the weakest when contemplating any economic measure to ensure that its policies do not disadvantage them in any way and that they can contribute their talents towards India's prosperity. AAP believes that the poor are best helped by empowering them with enhanced capability and the means to earn their livelihood with dignity. In case of those incapacitated and unable to engage in productive employment, AAP will try to facilitate a social security net that allows for a dignified existence. Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 14. Reinvigorating the Rural Economy For an equitable, pan-national, and sustainable growth, AAP will strive to provide all necessary amenities for sound farming practices and productive enterprises to proliferate in hereto neglected rural India. A vibrant decentralized rural economy with a prosperous agricultural sector is pivotal in creating a wide economic base and ensuring the long-term food, energy, and ecological security of India. AAP believes: i. India still lives in its villages. Without the development and prosperity of the villages, India cannot be prosperous. AAP is committed to ensuring that the people in rural areas have access to all the basic facilities enjoyed by their urban counterparts. li. Decentralisation and devolution of powers to Gram Sabhas, so that they can make decisions about development of their villages. iii. AAP seeks to counter the growing trend of migration under economic distress through a concerted push in traditional industries, small-scale enterprises, and agricultural sector, with better infrastructure availability, easy access to formal credit, appropriate technological interventions, and support for fair pricing. iv. AAP will invest in creating infrastructure in Tier-II and Tier-[II cities and smaller towns so that they could become the engines for the economic development of the surrounding areas. 15. Improving Farmers’ Livelihood The rural economy is in distress and thousands of farmers are committing suicide every year. On one hand, because of expensive seeds and fertilizer, farming is becoming expensive. On the other hand the government fixes such low rates for the crop that even the input cost is not covered. For example, in Rajasthan (2011-12), cost of production of maize was Rs.1164 per quintal but the MSP was Rs.980. This is what pushes farmers into committing suicide. Despite tens of thousands of crores of government expenditure in the name of farmers, there seems to be little improvement in the farmers' lives and livelihoods. AAP's policies would shift the focal point from merely increasing production, to ensuring farmers' income security and dignified livelihood. This was the basic tenet of the National Farmers Policy made by Swaminathan Commission, which was never implemented. AAP will: i. Implement recommendations of the Swaminathan Commission Report. il. Fair and remunerative MSP for diverse crops which would be 50% more than the real input cost. Extend MSP to 25 crops, including pulses, millets, and oilseeds, through direct procurement or timely market intervention. ii. Prevent farmers' suicides by ensuring farmers' — including small and tenant farmers — access to credit and insurance. iv. Ensure access to adequate healthcare facilities in rural areas, which are often immediate causes of farmers' suicides v. Ensure that farmers get a higher share of entire supply chain, by greater investment in agro- processing industries and marketing infrastructure (like cold storage, warehouses, etc) so that the agricultural produce is not wasted for want of technology and investment; evolve appropriate Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 V1. Vil. Vill. 16. methods for investment in rural infrastructure. Support for ecologically sustainable agriculture; special marketing incentives for organic produce; promote indigenous varieties of crops and livestock. Support local watershed management schemes to reduce the burden on large-scale irrigation projects. Regulate Genetically Modified crops to ensure that safety to food, human health and environment is ensured before the introduction of irreversible technologies. Environment and Natural Resources Policy In spite of being endowed with abundant natural resources, the aam aadmi's access to basic resources for well-being has been severely curtailed. All the recent big scams—such as land, coal, gas, and even spectrum— are directly linked to natural resource allocation and point towards an unethical scramble for our shared wealth and a deepening danger for our democracy. For their own personal gains, most of the existing political class have allowed the nation's natural wealth to be looted away in total disregard for the affected local communities, environmental and social costs, intergenerational equity, and without any benefit to the public exchequer. AAP will ensure: 1. il. lil. IV. Vi. Vil. The ownership of all major natural resources like major minerals, water and forests will vest in the State. However ownership of minor minerals and minor forest produce and rainwater will vest with the local communities. The local communities (Gram Sabhas) shall play a vital role in the management of major natural resources. The exploitation of minerals, water and forests within a Gram Sabha area will not be done without the consent of the Gram Sabhas. Commercial exploitation of natural resources would be done based on a royalty and revenue sharing agreement with local communities, to ensure that those who pay the cost of development, are also beneficiaries of this process. Preference to be given to Gram Sabha cooperatives for commercial exploitation of minerals. If mining or commercial exploitation of major natural resources requires persons to be displaced, the consent of the gram sabha will have to be taken and the oustees will be provided alternative sources of livelihood. Reform Ministry of Environment and Forests and its agencies so that they can empower and facilitate Gram Sabhas to be effective custodians and managers of their local natural resources. Phased shift towards renewable sources of energy; promote decentralized renewable energy solutions, such as solar power, biogas plants, watermills, and wind pumps, to reduce infrastructure and maintenance costs and encourage local ownership. Priority on developing local and decentralised water resources based on extensive rainwater harvesting, watershed development, soil-water conservation programs, small projects and alternative cropping practices. Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 Land Acquisition Policy The past few decades have seen large scale land acquisition in the country. Land acquisition process is one where the dependent communities often undergo extreme stress and are unable to cope witha loss of livelihood. Unless displaced communities are equipped with proper assets and skills, this may lead to massive social unrest throughout the country. A new Land Acquisition Act was passed by the parliament in 2013. While this is a good beginning, AAP would like to work towards fairer rehabilitation by e Ensuring that all acquisition done post September 2011 (date when the bill was tabled in the parliament) comes under the ambit of the new act. e Ensure a narrow and well defined ambit of the term 'public purpose' for which land can be acquired. e Ensuring acquisition happens only with the consent of the Gram Sabha e Making it mandatory to provide employment to one person per family that is losing land or livelihood (It is not a mandatory condition under the current act, only a recommendation), so that those who pay the price of development, can become beneficiaries in the process. 17. No Contractualization of Jobs The employment structure in the country has seen a strong shift towards contractual forms of employment in the last 10-15 years across different sectors. While there is a need for employee accountability, contractualisation 1s highly exploitative since basic benefits and safeguards extended to regular employees are absent for contract workers. For example, deductions for Provident Fund (PF) and Employee State Insurance (ESI) are often not deposited on employee accounts. Many employees work throughout the year without any paid leave. The 4am Aadmi Party is strongly opposed to exploitation in the work place. We will take the following steps to improve the condition of workers: i. Wewill not allow contractual employment for posts that require work to be done throughout the year. Examples include doctors, teachers, nurses, drivers, sanitation workers etc. Their jobs will be regularized which will allow workers to enjoy all benefits that permanent employees do. 11. In jobs that require temporary engagement for a few days or months (for example in the construction industry), it is not possible to eliminate contract labour. We will, however, take steps to ensure better working conditions in these sectors. ili. Strictimplementation of minimum wages; strong action will be taken regarding any violations of the law. iv. Non-discrimination with contract workers in terms of access to canteens, uniforms, company transport. Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 18. Social Security for the Unorganised Sector 92% of the workforce in India comprises of workers in the unorganized sector. This includes domestic workers, construction labour, security guards, rag-pickers, workers in small shops and restaurants, street-vendors, etc. who contribute significantly to the society and the economy, but often function under extremely exploitative conditions. In order to improve the condition of workers in the unorganized sector the Aam Aadmi Party will: 1. Ensure the creation of guidelines regarding their wages, working hours, or required facilities in place of work. 11. Regularize their working conditions and spaces, to prevent ongoing harassment by the police. ii. Ensure minimum social security benefits such as access to healthcare, old-age pensions, accident cover. Explore possibilities for evolving contributory schemes. 19. Protecting the Common Man from Rising Prices Today the biggest problems for the aam aadmi are the rising cost of living and unemployment. Statistics show that incomes have residents has risen, but in reality, due to the rise in costs of all basic necessities such as electricity, water, vegetables, food grains, petrol, diesel, education and health, the true economic situation of most families is worse than before. Whether it is onions and tomatoes or water and electricity or children's school fees, everything has become very expensive today. For the common man, inflation is reflected in the costs of daily necessities. dam Aadmi Party will take up the following measures: i. | Corruption and crony capitalism are two significant factors behind the rising prices of basic good and necessities of the aam aadmi. AAP is committed to fighting corruption in all domains, and this would be an important factor in combating rising prices. il. In retail and wholesale business, stringent measures will be taken to prevent hoarding and profiteering. Black market cannot survive without political patronage. Aam Aadmi Party will use the full strength of the law and government. The black marketeers will be arrested, their godowns raided and the hoarded goods will be released so that foodgrains, vegetables and fruits will be available for lower prices. ili. The expenditure on education is a substantial part of each family's expense. We will bring a law regulating the unbridled fees charged by the private schools and preventing them from collecting ‘donations’. We will improve the standard of government schools so that the aam aadmi can send their children to government schools with assurance about quality. These steps will reduce the cost of education. iv. We will increase the number of government hospitals and substantially improve the quality of services, so that the aam aadmi can fully utilize these services. This will reduce the expenditure on doctors and medical treatment. Ration shops and the public distribution system protect the aam aadmi from rising costs. But the ration shop system is steeped in corruption. The 4am Aadmi Party government will end corruption in the public distribution system with the involvement of mohalla sabhas. Instead of direct cash transfer, we will ensure direct transfer of ration materials to the families and will include dal and oil in the public distribution system. Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 SOCIAL JUSTICE 20. Gender Justice We envision a world in which women will be acknowledged and treated as equal citizens in their own right; where they will not be governed by male-dominated values which determine their societal and familial roles. The entire policy framework needs to keep the 'aam aurat' at the centre. We can only call ourselves a democratic, modern and progressive nation when we truly advance and deliver on women's rights, freedom, security equality and empowerment. Towards this, 1. il. iil. IV. V1. Vil. Viil. Implement comprehensive and long-term public education programmes to end the culture of gender-based discrimination and violence. These will include: SMS, radio and TV public service campaigns, accessible lesson plans for schools, modules for training teachers and to train professionals such as doctors and lawyers. To this end we will reach men, women, boys and girls in both urban and rural areas. AAP will adopt a zero tolerance approach towards sex selective abortion and work towards its complete elimination by strengthening legislation against its practice and implementation of strict punishments if violated; budgeting at Central, State and local level for initiating an extensive sensitization campaign. Ensure secure, dignified, remunerative employment for women. Action plans will be created to secure equal pay for equal work in all sectors; provide anganwadis to MNREGA workers; rights, dignity and minimum wage to all women workers in the organised and unorganised sectors. Ensure that each government agency produces a detailed action-plan to implement laws to end violence against women. Work with state governments to provide comprehensive services to women who are victims of violent crimes, helping them to fund and set up one-stop, 24-hour crisis centres and safe shelters in each police district, and to give swift financial compensation. Work with state governments to establish responsive and fair fast track courts for crimes of violence against women. Support 33% reservation for women in Parliament and State Legislature, and ensure that women will be represented in all councils, committees and task forces related to policy and practice across the board. We will support the adoption of a Code of Conduct to end misogynist comments and behaviour in the Lok Sabha. Strengthen the autonomous functioning of the National and State Commissions for Women, with experienced professionals being selected through a transparent process. Establish and enforce a comprehensive response protocol for crimes against women, and publicise it. We will work with state governments to change service rules and ensure police and prosecutorial recruitment, promotion and penalties include attitudes and performances based on gender. Establish rape crisis response teams, with rural and urban pilot projects. Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 1 { 21. Ending Caste-based Inequalities A significant portion of our society has been discriminated against as untouchables, and has suffered severe humiliation and injustice in the past. Even after sixty-five years of independence caste-based inequality and untouchability still exists in parts of our country. The constitution promises non- discrimination based on caste, gender, religion or any accident of birth, and yet this discrimination exists. It is the responsibility of whole society to honor and love all brethren and march forward together. The Indian constitution visualises fraternity among all Indians by ensuring social and economic justice and equalities of opportunity. The reservation system was introduced to resolve the issue of social inequality. Unfortunately, this inequality still exists and all political outfits have used the issue of reservations to create vote banks for themselves. Vested political interests have ensured that the most marginalized sections of society remain marginalized and become the fodder for vote banks. The Aam Aadmi Party believes: i. In today's unequal society, reservation is essential for the advancement of the deprived and marginalized section of the society. Therefore, we support the existing constitutional provisions of reservations in higher education and government jobs. We are committed to ensuring the effective implementation of existing provisions of reservations. lil. The benefits of reservations should accrue to those who need it the most, from these marginalised groups. Therefore, those who have already availed the benefits of reservation should be placed at the end of the queue. In this manner the benefits of reservations would go to those who are the most needy. ii. Inthe long-run, equality of opportunity requires improving and expanding government schools and higher education institutions. AAP is committed to ensuring access to high quality school and higher education, for all children, irrespective of whether they are rich or poor. tv. Increasing livelihood opportunities by giving support and incentives for setting up businesses and enterprises; this would include access to loans, marketing support, etc. v. Widespread public education to change the mindset of caste-based inequality and untouchability; to remove this venomous tendency of untouchability from people's minds; campaign to create a civil environment which fosters amity and harmony between different castes. 22. Life Of Dignity to the Valmiki Community The Valmiki Community has suffered from untouchability and severe forms of exploitation for centuries. They continue to form the largest share of workers engaged in solid waste management and sanitation-related work. No political parties have improved the plight of the 'safai karamcharis' by providing them with education and better opportunities for employment or through enhancing their dignity. Aam Aadmi Party will provide the following measures for the Valmiki Community: i. Many members of the Valmiki community work as 'safai karamcharis’, often as contractual labor or on daily wages. AAP will end contractualisation in 'safai karamchar1' posts and will regularize existing employees. We will provide opportunities for promotions and career, by providing access to education and training. Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 il. ill. 1V. A key reason for the Valmiki Community's continued work as 'safai karamcharis' is due to the lack of good educational opportunities. Poverty forces them to send their children to government schools where the quality of education is extremely poor, making them incapable of accessing higher education or employment in other sectors. We will provide better educational opportunities by improving government schools and colleges. Provisions will also be made to encourage members of the community to pursue higher education at the college and university level. The Aam Aadmi Party will take steps to ensure that members of the Valmiki Community do not face discrimination in education and employment. We will assist them in setting up their own enterprises by providing access to low-interest loans. Workers who enter sewage drains will be provided with protective gear, like masks, suits, machines and insurance, in the model of fire fighters. 23. Secularism and Communal Harmony India is founded on the conviction that people belonging to different faiths can not only tolerate each other, but in fact learn from each other and grow together into something greater. Aam Aadmi Party believes that this country belongs to people of all religions. Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, Christians, Buddhists —absence of any one of these will render the country incomplete. The diversity of India is its distinct trait. Those practising politics in the name of religion would be dealt with strictly. There would be zero tolerance towards attempts to spread poison towards any religion. Secularism as practiced in India is a positive belief based upon provisions of religious freedom, provisions for minorities to pursue their beliefs and practices and celebration of the diversity of religious beliefs, and cultural traditions. AAP will work towards: 1. il. ill. iv. Vi. Vil. Prevention of communal violence is a sacred commitment of the state; state to ensure justice to all victims of communal riots and set up fast track courts where necessary Ensuring prompt action by state to prevent the outbreak of communal violence and swift use of security forces to prevent escalation. Commitment to thorough and time bound investigation to identify masterminds behind riots; strictest of punishment to those found guilty; punishment also to those officials who fail to perform their duty of controlling communal violence. In the aftermath of riots, the State should to be duty-bound to start processes that rebuild ties between affected communities. This is vital to prevent escalation of violence and restoration of communal harmony. A majority community in one state may be a disadvantaged, minority community in another State and the protection/ facilities provided to minority communities should be available to them. Neither majority beliefs nor minority rights should be used to justify practices which are in violation of the basic rights and values for all men and women enshrined in our constitution. Foster and promote understanding between the communities through dialogue, interaction and cultural exchanges. Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 1 9 24. Security and Non-discrimination for Muslims For the last 66 years, the Muslims of our country have voted for Congress, to prevent the BJP from coming to power. This vote has happened due to the fear and the absence of any real alternative. The Congress has ensured that the Muslim community remains backward, so that they can be used as a vote- bank. The betrayal of the Muslim community can be seen in hundreds of major and minor riots, poor conditions of schools and madarsas, imprisonment of youth on false charges, corruption in the Waqf Board, the 'carrot' of reservations, a defunct Minorities Commission. Despite a Congress-led Central Government, the Muslims of India live in constant fear. Aam Aadmi Party is committed to put an end to communal tension and riots by ensuring equal rights and security to the community. We believe that both the communal politics of the BJP as well as the vote- bank politics of the Congress need to be opposed. The Aam Aadmi Party will further the interests of the Muslim Community in the following ways: i. Wewill ensure that the practice of police harassment and filing false cases against Muslim youth is put to an end. Police officials found guilty of harassment will be prosecuted. Judicial reforms to ensure that cases are decided within six months. Swift dispensation of justice for Muslim youth arrested on charges of terrorist activity. Strict action will be taken against those found guilty. We will make sure that the innocent are not jailed on false charges. il. Large sections of the Muslim community cannot afford to send their children to good private schools due to poverty. We are committed to improving the quality of education in government schools across Delhi. We will also ensure that Muslim children do not face any discrimination while seeking admission in private and government schools. 111. Today reservation policies are religion-based and therefore, Dalit Muslims and Dalit Christians do not fall under the SC category. AAP believes that reservation should be religion-neutral, and based on actual disadvantage. tv. Due to the poor educational facilities and inadequate livelihood opportunities, the members of Muslim community are often engaged in the unorganized sector. Aam Aadmi Party is committed to provide economic security to workers in the unorganized sector, including Muslims, by regularizing their occupation. v. Control and management of Waqf properties to be de-bureacratised and oriented towards benefits to the community. 29. Adivasis: Taking Charge of their own Development Despite constitutional recognition and a host of policies, most adivasi communities have remained excluded from state-led development and participation in education, organised sector jobs and have remained largely voiceless in the political arena. The following policy measure needs to be taken: 1. Effective decentralisation and devolution of powers to Gram Sabhas, so that adivasis can make decisions about their own development. 11. PESA and the Forest Rights Act to be effectively implemented to ensure that there is no land acquisition or extraction from forest areas without permission of Gram Sabhas, and their right to manage, sustainably use and protect all natural resources are fully protected. Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 ill. iv. Vi. Vil. Vill. Larger strategic plan for our mineral resources including coal, iron ore and bauxite, given most of these are located in adivasi areas; benefits of extraction to be shared with local communities. Ensuring access to education and healthcare; special provisions to improve health and nutrition indicators. Special provisions for infrastructure development in Schedule V areas. Training and skill upgradation for modern livelihood and employment, special availability of credit facilities and support in accessing market; effective implementation of reservations. Provide greater cultural and economic autonomy to these communities; for example, teaching in adivasi languages, have community radio and media in adivasi languages. Sensitization of local police and push for police accountability. 26. Empowering Persons with Disability Persons with Disability (PwD) constitute a social group whose disadvantage is obvious to common sense, but invisible to official policy that has so far not even taken the first steps to address their conditions. To this end, the following measures need to be taken: 1. il. lil. IV. Expand definition of Disability using a social rights-based model; institute a system of regular data collection on the numbers and conditions of PwD; effective implementation of existing provision of 3% reservation for PwD. Effort to make public infrastructure (including buildings, transport and communication) to be made barrier-free Special provisions for PwD in education and employment opportunities Focus on policies and measures that can prevent disabilities (such as polio, blindness and some cognitive disabilities), public provision of ongoing healthcare support and subsidies for specific equipments needed for different forms of disability. Any decision-making body regarding PwD, must include a majority of PwD. 27. Nomadic and De-notified Communities Nomadic and de-notified communities/ tribes (DNTs) are some of the most vulnerable, stigmatised and invisible communities in India. The following policy measures need to be taken: 1. il. ill. IV. Constitutional recognition for this category at par with SC and ST, and accurate enumeration and survey of conditions of DNTs; a permanent statutory commission for DNTs and extension of Prevention of Atrocities act to DNTs Ensuring access to education and healthcare, including mobile schools and dispensaries Training and skill upgradation for modern livelihood and employment, special availability of credit facilities and support in accessing market Infrastructural support to provide basic amenities to semi-permanent or permanent settlements of DNTs Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 28. Animal Welfare India has amongst the richest traditions of respecting animals and living peacefully alongside them ina spirit of Ahimsa (non-violence) towards all living beings. The great king Ashoka (304—232 BC) is the first known king to officially make the welfare of animals a central tenet of his administration, and his rock edicts are the first to articulate basic rights for animals. Our foremost thinkers and leaders, including Mahatma Gandhi, promoted animal welfare, and the Constitution of India lists compassion towards animals as a fundamental duty of all citizens. There is a need to reaffirm our traditional respect towards animals, and design policies and laws that provide animals a life of dignity. Towards this end we will: i. The powers of the Animal Welfare Board of India (AWBI), will also be enhanced so they go beyond being an advisory body, to a regulatory authority with executive powers. il. Tohelp strengthen enforcement and raise awareness, law enforcement agencies will be educated and trained on animal laws, as well as best practices on dealing with violations. ii. Several industries that use animals for food, clothing, or entertainment, view them solely as resources to be exploited for a profit. Policies to protect the dignity of these animals will be pursued, and these industries will be tightly regulated and closely monitored. iv. The scope and enforcement of the Wildlife Act, 1972, will be strengthened to deter potential defaulters, and prevent the encroachment of protected forestland inhabited by wild animals. Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 SPORTS, CULTURE AND MEDIA 29. Sports and Culture il. ill. IV. Vi. Vil. Keeping corrupt and criminals out of sports administration by ensuring that individuals who have charges framed against them by any court shall not be allowed to contest and/or hold any elected office in any National Sports Federation (NSF). Ensuring adequate representation of sportspersons in any NSF decision-making body Zero-tolerance towards doping, age fraud practices, as well as sexual harassment of athletes Setting up state-of-the-art facilities, equipment and infrastructure including multipurpose stadiums in villages and small towns & cities; encourage private entrepreneurs to invest in Indian sports at the grassroot level to tap and nurture talent by giving them subsidised land on long term leases, tax-breaks and other incentives. Making sports and cultural activities an integral part of school education; provide children exposure to the diverse cultures that co-exist in India. Numerous museums that house the history and heritage of our country; yet these are in a shameful state of mismanagement and disrepair. Museums would be made more accessible and interesting, and their management improved. Schools would be encourages to bring their students to these museums on an ongoing basis. Investment in public libraries in village clusters and small towns; their ongoing upkeep and maintenance to be done by Gram Sabhas (or Mohalla Sabhas). 30. Media Policy The growth of media industry has been impressive but its excessive focus on maximization of profits and a lack of credible regulation has led to serious imbalances like 'paid news' and the creation of big media oligopolies. While AAP appreciates the need for a vibrant and independent media, we are concerned about the increasing allegations of ‘paid news'. The main reasons for this include the media's lack of public accountability and overwhelming dependence on advertising. The media industry is not subject to any statutory regulations of disclosure despite its profound influence over daily lives. Towards this, AAP will 1. il. lil. Explore methods of enforcing public accountability and regulation on the media industry which are not coercive and which do not threaten the Constitutional guarantees provided under Article 19 on freedom of expression. This regulation needs to go hand-in-hand with freedom from interference from the state and political authority. Curb on ‘paid news', which is a violation of basic principle of media ethics, fairness and professionalism. In legal terms it amounts to an open violation of media, electoral and taxation laws. Any regulation therefore must include severe punishment for paid news and motivated or deliberately inflammatory reporting. Cross media ownership regulations to ensure a competitive environment by prohibiting big media monopolies; state monopoly of news broadcasting on radio to end. Transparency and disclosure of ownership of media houses, their loans, as well as the political affiliations of owners and journalists. Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 iv. Explore options to encourage public service media institutions and convert the state-owned media (or state-supported autonomous institutions like Doordarshan, All India Radio, Lok Sabha Television and Rajya Sabha Television) into true public service institutions with decentralized, professional and autonomous management structures. v. Freeing of airwaves for community use and strengthen the 2002 Community Radio policy. Incentivize licensing of community radios in underdeveloped and remote areas of the country. Lift prohibition on broadcasting of news and current affairs programs on Community Radio and private radio stations. NATIONAL SECURITY In keeping with the ideals of Indian independence movement, India has both the possibility and the responsibility of offering an alternative universality to the world. India's power and security is bound to be greatest when India develops on its own terms. Such Swaraj would both guarantee security and foster mutual co-operation, at the individual, community, and national level. The idea of security here is not just safety from armed aggression and violence, but rather the basic security necessary for Swaraj must include human security, security from hunger, indignities or access to necessities of life and livelihood. This perspective on human security shall guide Aam Aadmi Party's policies in the internal as well as external domain. 31. Defence Policy Through their dedication, hard-work, and sacrifice, Indian armed forces and the defence establishment seek to provide the basic. In line with its continued fight against corruption, AAP believes the widespread corruption and misappropriation of funds meant for national security is a grave disservice to the nation. AAP sees both the welfare of the armed forces community and the modernisation of the military to maintain strategic advantage as high priority measures. 1. Integrated approach to all three services; involvement of defence personnel in the process of making decisions on national security issues; commitment to better coordination between the military, intelligence, bureaucracy, and the political leadership. ii. Transparency in defence procurement; corruption and middlemen need to be fought, not just for transparency but also to protect India's war-fighting capabilities. ili. India is world's largest importer of weapons; need to encourage indigenous production and reduce dependence on foreign defence equipment in a short time span. iv. Expedite construction of infrastructure in border areas; border roads, and other infrastructure needs for staging, acclimatization and logistic purposes, airfields and ports will be created based on the overall strategic plans and needs of the defence services. v. Ensure effective implementation of One Rank One Pension. vi. Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS) as a model health insurance scheme in the country; further reforms in military justice with speedy grievance redressal mechanisms. 24 Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 32. Foreign Policy India's foreign policy would focus on establishing friendly and cordial relationships with all countries, on equal terms. Towards this end, we believe in: 1. il. lil. iV. Vi. Vil. Zero tolerance policy towards cross-border terrorism. Coordinate bilateral and multilateral efforts to prosecute terrorists and for better border management. Call for sustained dialogue at various levels to dismantle the structures that encourage terrorism. Reducing political hostilities in our immediate neighbourhood through confidence building, and providing development and relief assistance to our neighbours. While enhancing the capacity to deter border incursions by China, focus of Sino-Indian relations to be shifted to greater and more balanced trade and recover Sino-Indian civilisational exchange. Develop border areas as zones of high economic engagement to create a larger constituency for peace on both sides and tackle illegal immigration. Supplement India's meaningful engagement with the US, with that of other blocs such as the BRICS, and IBSA and encourage a multi-polar world. Promote the legitimacy and power of truly global institutions such as the UN and demand democratization of bodies such as IMF. Continue to play an active role in protecting agricultural and rural communities in the developing world against first world subsidies through WTO. Advocate UN oversight of all global commons and enhance cooperation on the ecological crisis. Demand greater investment in renewable energy and transfer of technology from the developed countries as they remain the predominant consumers of fossil fuel energy and drivers of climate change. This is integral to our energy and economic security. 33. Internal Security The challenge of internal security cannot be seen and addressed merely as a law and order problem. While effectively protecting the citizens from terrorism and pre-mediated violence, the main thrust of AAP's internal security policy will be on redressing the root causes of citizens’ disaffection through political decentralisation, negotiations with alienated groups, and improving the economic well-being of the people. 1. il. ll. 1V. Creating locally responsive structures of policing, security and governance while working towards a long-term solution of effective decentralization and devolution of power. Modernized, better equipped and trained security forces. The government must abandon the use of extra-constitutional methods and ensure that there are checks and balances against misuse of authority. Strike a delicate balance between the security apparatus' need to work with an exceptional mandate outside the public glare and a system of accountability, which safeguards constitutionally guaranteed individual rights, addresses public grievances, and allows for a robust public debate on matters of national importance. Review and reform of laws like AFSPA to make them time-bound and humane; sexual violence against women by armed forces not be given impunity. Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 V1. We believe that Kashmir is an integral part of India, and there would be zero-tolerance towards cross-border terrorism. In addition to short-term use of security forces, AAP believes in a long- term approach of decentralisation and devolution of power, which would give people of Kashmir the ability to make decisions for their own development. Long-term solution to Naxalite issue requires that deeper political and socio-economic grievances of the region be addressed. Apart from modernising security forces, our approach would be rooted in multi-lateral dialogue, social and economic development, and effective political decentralization. Aam Aadmi Party: National Manifesto - 2014 Aiea: U-119, Alene, mfsara<, SOW-201010 IA: 9718500606, Syc: contact@aamaadmiparty.org Wwww.aamaadmiparty.org | Facebook: AamAadmiParty | Twitter: @AamAadmiParty
