LOK SABHA 2 19 AAM AADMI PARTY DELHI MANIFESTO ys dj jgsa axs s iw.kZ jkT; DELHI MANIFESTO TABLE OF CONTENTS I. Message by Arvind Kejriwal ........................................................... 03 II. Our Promise: Full Statehood for Delhi ........................................... 05 III. What It Means To Be a Full State ................................................ 06 IV. Full Statehood: Transformation in Key Areas 1. Education ................................................................................. 10 2. Health ........................................................................................ 12 3. Women Safety ......................................................................... 14 4. Police Reforms ....................................................................... 16 5. Zero Corruption ........................................................................ 18 6. Jobs ............................................................................................ 20 7. Land and Housing .................................................................. 22 8. Prevention from Sealing ...................................................... 24 9. Cleanliness .............................................................................. 26 10. Pollution .................................................................................. 28 11. Transport ................................................................................... 30 12. Yamuna Rejuvenation ............................................................ 32 V. Delhi vs Other National Capitals: A Tragedy of Democracy ... 34 VI. History of Struggle for Full Statehood ........................................... 35 Arvind Kejriwal Chief Minister Residence: 6, Flag Staff Road, Civil Lines, New Delhi-110054 Dear People of Delhi! Time has arrived that we seek answers to some important questions. Why is Delhi still not clean despite being the capital of our country? Why are women not safe in Delhi? Why don't our children get admission in Delhi's colleges even if they get 90% marks? Why are the youth unemployed? Why are unauthorized colonies not being regularized? Why is sealing being undertaken at such a massive scale in Delhi? The answer to all these questions is one – Delhi is not a full state. Today, Delhi government has to take permission from the Centre for each of its works. And the Central government puts obstacles on each work. In addition, agencies that deal with the everyday problems of the people of Delhi such as Delhi Police, DDA and MCD fall directly under the Centre's jurisdiction. The people of Delhi have no say in them. There's only one solution – Delhi should be granted full statehood just like all other states. All government agencies should come under the purview of the elected government. With full statehood, several dreams of the people of Delhi will be realized. Women safety will considerably improve. Law and order in Delhi will improve. Youth will get jobs. Every child who has scored more than 60% marks in 12th Standard will get a college admission. Sealing will be stopped in Delhi. Every Delhi resident will have a house of his/her own. Unauthorized colonies will be regularized. Delhi will be a clean and beautiful city. Delhi will accelerate towards the path of development. Despite many hurdles, your government has achieved remarkable progress in the ields of education, health, electricity, water etc. We ful illed all the promises that we made. With full statehood, we assure you that we will ful ill all the above promises. Both BJP and Congress made promises that they will get full statehood for Delhi. Modiji, before he became the Prime Minister, had also demanded full statehood for Delhi. But both these parties have betrayed the trust of the people of Delhi. Aam Aadmi Party is your own party. When the AAP sends MPs to the Lok Sabha, we will ensure that this time we make Delhi a full state. I have spoken to many parties. They will support our demand for full statehood for Delhi in the Parliament. Till today, you have voted in Lok Sabha elections to elect your Prime Minister. Now it's time to vote to make Delhi a full state. History and almighty give an opportunity only once. Delhi has its opportunity at this moment. This time, vote for the Aam Aadmi Party so that Delhi becomes a full state. Yours sincerely, Arvind Kejriwal Our Promise: Full Statehood for Delhi Despite being the national capital, the life of an aam aadmi in Delhi has reduced to that of a secondclass citizen. In any other state, the vote of a citizen has full power. The voters use this power to elect a full- ledged State government. But when the aam aadmi in Delhi go to vote, they elect a Government with severely limited powers. Why is it that, even after 70 years of independence, an aam aadmi of Delhi does not have the right to elect a full- ledged government with his vote? Why is it that when the children of Delhi need schools, colleges and universities, they have to be dependent on the Central government? Whereas in other states, their elected State government has full freedom to provide schools, colleges and universities. Similarly, for basic issues such as jobs, women security, aﬀordable housing and facilities for traders, why is it that the aam aadmi of Delhi is dependent on the Central Government? Why can't they choose their own State government to deliver all such facilities? The reason is that Delhi doesn't have the status of a full state. In comparison, in the national capitals of almost all countries around the world, it is the local government elected by the people that has full powers. Why is it that only in Delhi, even for the smallest of things, a common citizen has to knock the doors of three to four governments. The Aam Aadmi Party has resolved to stop this harassment of the people of Delhi. The Aam Aadmi Party has decided to secure full statehood for Delhi. Our proposal for full statehood is de ined in the draft State of Delhi Bill 2016 brought out by the AAP government. The draft bill proposes that the New Delhi area (under the jurisdiction of New Delhi Municipal Council) which is of national and international importance be kept under the ambit of Central government. It must be noted that only 3% of Delhi's population lives in this area. The rest of the areas will transition to a full state. The Aam Aadmi Party is ighting the Lok Sabha 2019 elections in Delhi with the sole objective of making Delhi a full state. Through the voice of all our seven Lok Sabha MPs from Delhi, our Lok Sabha MPs from other states and our three Rajya Sabha MPs, the Aam Aadmi Party will ight from the parliament to the streets to secure full statehood for Delhi. The Aam Aadmi Party will join hands with all other political parties in the country who have an emotional attachment with the people of Delhi and believe in the right of the people of Delhi to have a full vote, to ensure that Delhi gets the status of a full state. 5 What It Means To Be a Full State With full statehood, Delhi Government will have control over: 1. Land 2. Law and order 3. Police 4. Control over of icials and decision making With these powers, AAP resolves to do the following for the people of Delhi: Land in class 12 from Delhi schools will be guaranteed admission in a college. Since land in Delhi is a reserved subject under the Constitution of India, it is under the control of Central government. As a result, the Delhi Development Authority (DDA) operates under the control of Centre denying Delhi government the opportunity to make any policy regarding land such as housing schemes, decision on commercial and residential usage of land, optimum and eﬀective utilization of land resources etc. With full statehood, AAP resolves to: ¨ Build enough new mohalla clinics to provide for Universal Healthcare at the doorstep (within 1 km) of each citizen. ¨ Expansion of existing hospitals and build new hospitals to create provision for thousands of additional beds. ¨ Every single family in Delhi will be able to own their own house in 10 years. ¨ Regularization of all unauthorized colonies ¨ Allocate land to build hundreds of schools in Delhi. and colleges which will ensure: n Free, guaranteed schooling facilities for ¨ Additional bus depots and terminals to all children in the age group of 3 to 18 years (nursery to 12th) residing in Delhi. cater to all the extra buses that Delhi needs. ¨ Ensure a congestion free Delhi by removal of road encroachments and improving road design. n All students securing above 60% marks Law and Order ¨ Take all steps necessary to make Delhi the safest city in India for women. All cases of crime against woman to be tried by Fast Track courts. ¨ Improve the conviction rate for all crimes in Delhi, especially against women which is currently at 19%. ¨ Ensure higher and equitable distribution of PCR vans across Delhi so that the response time of a PCR van to reach a caller anywhere in Delhi is less than 5 minutes. ¨ Revive the Anti-Corruption Bureau (ACB) just like we did in the 49 days government to break the spine of corruption in Delhi. 6 Police ¨ Make Delhi Police accountable to the people of Delhi. All ground personnel will be equipped with Police Body Cameras and CCTVs will be installed in all corners of police stations. ¨ Fill nearly 2/3rd of the posts lying vacant in Delhi police and ensure reservation of 33% of the posts for women. ¨ Professionalization of police force by providing world-class skills training on advance methods of policing and modern infrastructure. ¨ Initiate long-pending police reforms as directed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of Prakash Singh versus Union of India, 2006. Control over officials and decision making Though the Constitution of India has reserved only three subjects – land, law and order, and police – to come under Centre's jurisdiction in Delhi, the decision making within Delhi government and control over of icials has been illegally held captive by the present BJP-ruled Central government. With full statehood, AAP resolves to: ¨ Fill existing vacancies of over 2 lakh government jobs in Delhi Police, Education, Health Department etc. with 85% reservation for residents of Delhi. ¨ Ensure there is zero tolerance to corruption by government functionaries. ¨ Set up Delhi Public Service Commission for recruitment of State level cadre of civil servants other than those of All India Services. ¨ As many as 14 bills passed by the Delhi Assembly in last 4 years have been awaiting consent from the Central government. With full statehood, no approval or concurrence will be needed once the Delhi Assembly passes laws on any subject mentioned in State list. We will enact: n All the 14 bills pending for consent with the Central government. This includes the Jan Lokpal bill. n A model Mohalla Sabha bill that will bring in true decentralization and Swaraj for every aam aadmi. n A bill that guarantees free and compulsory provision of education from nursery to Class 12th (age 3 to 18) for residents of Delhi. 7 Full StateTransformation in key areas Education Education is the top priority for Aam Aadmi Party. Delhi Government spends 26% of its annual budget on Education, which is much higher than any other State in India. Over the last 4 years, Delhi government has led an unprecedented transformation in the Education sector. However, full statehood to Delhi is essential for building more infrastructure to deliver equal opportunity to every child in Delhi. The biggest impediment to reform is that Delhi government does not have control over land and recruitment of teachers on permanent basis. What we did without Full Statehood What we will do after Full Statehood ¨ In 2015, Delhi's government schools ¨ Expanded Right to School had 24,157 classrooms. Despite all the hurdles laid by Central Government, AAP Government has built 8,213 new classrooms. By November 2019, another 12,748 new classrooms will be completed. Education: Every child in Delhi will be entitled to free, world class education from Nursery to Class 12 (age 3-18 years), so that s/he can become a happy, aware and capable citizen. ¨ Right to College Education: Students ¨ The teachers of Delhi government of Delhi Schools securing more than 60% marks in Class 12, shall get gauranteed admission in a college as regular student. schools have been sent to coveted institutes in Finland, Singapore & United Kingdom for training so that the students can get world class education. ¨ Reservation for Delhi's students in ¨ Special initiatives have been launched college admissions: In every college of Delhi, 85% of seats will be reserved for the residents of Delhi. to strengthen foundational learning skills. New initiatives like Happiness Curriculum, Entrepreneurship Curriculum & Campaign on Constitutional Values are being introduced to provide holistic education to children. ¨ Expand infrastructure and teaching strength: Build new schools and colleges and recruit regular teachers as per the requirement to provide quality education in accordance with new law. ¨ For the irst time, parents were ¨ Regularisation of Guest teachers: All involved in the functioning of the school through School Management Committees. Mega Parents Teachers' Meetings are organized every quarter in Delhi government schools. existing Guest teachers serving the schools of Delhi Government shall be regularized. ¨ Expand medical and engineering education: New Medical and Engineering colleges shall be started to increase the annual intake by 10,000. ¨ For the irst time ever, Delhi's government schools have performed better than Delhi's private schools in 12th Class results consecutively for the last three years. ¨ New roster: A 200 point roster will be implemented for higher education institutes (Universities & Colleges). ¨ Delhi government provides Guarantee Free Loan Scheme upto Rs 10 lakhs for the students passing Class 12th in Delhi. 11 Health The Aam Aadmi Party is committed to providing Universal Healthcare to all the residents of Delhi. In the last four years, Delhi's health budget has more than doubled. The AAP Government spends 13% of its annual budget on health, as compared to an average of 5% for all other states. A unique three tier-network of facilities is being built to provide Universal Healthcare, comprising of Mohalla Clinics to provide primary care, Polyclinics to provide secondary care and Specialty Government Hospitals to provide tertiary care. After becoming a full state, Delhi government will not be subject to the continuous obstruction by Central government in expansion of Delhi's health infrastructure, and will move closer to realizing the vision of providing aﬀordable healthcare for all. What we did without Full Statehood What we will do after Full Statehood ¨ Aam Aadmi Mohalla Clinics have been ¨ Mohalla Clinics at Doorstep: With conceptualized to provide free, high quality primary care in every neighbourhood. Currently, 189 clinics are operational and a total of 1000 are targeted by 2020. full statehood, we will build enough new mohalla clinics to provide accessible healthcare at the doorstep (within 1 km) of every resident of Delhi. ¨ All clinics and hospitals under Delhi ¨ Expansion in hospital government provide free diagnosis, tests and medicines for all. Besides, if any government hospital fails to provide treatment within 30 days for any life-saving surgery, the Delhi Government guarantees free treatment in any empaneled private hospital. infrastructure: With control over land, AAP shall undertake a large scale expansion of existing hospitals and build new hospitals to increase bed capacity in Delhi. ¨ Provision of adequate doctors and medical staﬀ: We shall ensure appointment of adequate number of doctors and paramedical staﬀ for all health facilities in Delhi. ¨ AAP government has undertaken a massive expansion in hospital infrastructure. In 2015, the number of beds in Delhi's government hospitals was 7226, which has crossed 10,000. In addition, ive new hospitals are under construction which will take the number of beds to 13,819. ¨ Uni ied health system: With control over local bodies, AAP government will ensure convergence between the Municipal healthcare system and the state healthcare system. ¨ Delhi government has ensured that people injured in road accidents in Delhi are treated free of cost by any private hospital. More than 3,000 victims have bene ited under this scheme so far. 13 Women Safety Safety and security of women in Delhi is among the top priorities of Aam Aadmi Party. Crime against women has seen a phenomenal increase of 83% between 2007 and 2016. Delhi is dubbed as crime capital of India with the highest crime rate which is more than double of the national average. At 19%, the conviction rate for crimes against women has been the lowest in a decade. To empower the women who constitute half of the population, it is necessary that the government takes transformative measures to ensure their safety and security. Full statehood will bring Delhi Police under the jurisdiction of Delhi's elected government and subsequently a meaningful impact on women's safety could be realized. What we did without Full Statehood What we will do after Full Statehood ¨ 1.4 lakh CCTV cameras are ¨ 33% representation of women in police: We will being installed with 2000 cameras in each assembly constituency to make streets and public places safer for women. ¨ The AAP government has revived the Delhi Commission for Women to safeguard women's rights in Delhi. The DCW has dealt with more than 50,000 cases in 3 years, an annual increase of over 700% compared to the work done by the previous Commission in 8 years. ¨ Under DCW, Mahila Panchayat has become an innovative collective approach for grass root community participation in dispute redressal. There are 90 functioning Mahila Panchayats currently in Delhi. ¨ Bus Marshalls have been deployed in nearly 2500 DTC buses and are being deployed in all other city buses. Project for installation of CCTVs, panic buttons and GPS tracking in all city buses is underway to ensure safety of women in public transport. ensure minimum 33% reservation for women in all posts under Delhi Police. Eﬀorts will be made to engage women in active policing roles. ¨ Establish protocols: Police protocols and procedures for eﬀective response to crimes against women will be set up, strictly implemented and communicated to public to foster greater trust in reporting among women. ¨ CAW cell in each police station: Each police station will have a trained CAW (Crimes Against Women) cell with specially trained and sensitized investigative of icers and counselors operating in shifts. The cell will provide free legal assistance to victim. ¨ Fast track courts: 50 fast track courts will be set up to provide faster trials in cases concerning crimes against women. ¨ Gender sensitisation trainings: Massive scale gender sensitization programmes will be launched for police personnel at all levels. The police will be given special training to deal will sexual oﬀences appropriately. ¨ Preventive Policing: Preventive rather than punitive role of the police will be strengthened. Transformative campaigns will be organized by police to engage with communities on issues of equitable gender attitudes, reduction in perpetration behavior and promotion of legal awareness. Community policing will be developed by providing training to volunteers. ¨ Periodic safety audits: Periodic systematic safety review and audit of public spaces by the police in collaboration with community. Increased and regular patrolling by women police personnel will be initiated at vulnerable sites like bus terminals, auto stands and metro stations. 15 Police Reforms Under the Constitution of India, Police is a state subject. However, since Delhi is not a full State, the Delhi Police is under the control of Central Government. Due to zero accountability of Delhi Police towards the people of Delhi, the crime situation in the national capital has rapidly deteriorated. Today Delhi has the highest crime rate in India, whereas the conviction rate is only 52%. With full statehood, AAP will make Delhi police fully accountable to the people of Delhi and set new standards of professional and quality policing. Extensive reforms will be initiated in line with the directions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of Prakash Singh versus Union of India, 2006 to modernize Delhi Police. What we will do after Full Statehood ¨ Fill vacancies in police force: Delhi Police is highly understaﬀed with 2/3rd of the positions lying vacant. AAP will ensure that all the vacant posts are illed, along with a 33% reservation for women. ¨ Response time of PCR van to be 5 minutes: Increase in the patrolling of police and greater presence of PCR vans will be ensured in proportion to the population in a particular area. The response time for PCR to reach the complainant at any place in Delhi will be 5 minutes. ¨ World Class Skills Training: Major initiative shall be taken for professionalization of police force by providing world-class skills training on advance methods of policing. ¨ Modernize police infrastructure: Greater funding will be set aside for modernization of police infrastructure. Improved working conditions for the police force will be ensured so that they can pursue their duties without stress. ¨ Transparency and professionalism: We will establish greater transparency in public- dealing by police. All ground personnel will be equipped with Police Body Cameras and CCTVs will be installed in all corners of police stations. ¨ Citizen participation: We will revive Thana-level citizen committees comprising of elected representatives, RWAs, women's organisations and others for closer interaction and better understanding between police and local communities. 17 Zero Corruption The Aam Aadmi Party was born out of a nationwide anti-corruption movement. Our party maintains zero tolerance towards corruption. We irmly believe that every paisa of the tax paid by the people should be spent for their welfare. To ensure this, in the irst term of our government, we took swift actions against the corrupt through the Anti Corruption Branch. But immediately after the AAP Government was formed for the second time in 2015, the ACB was taken away from Delhi government by the Central Government. With Full Statehood, Delhi will have its Anti Corruption Branch and we will strive to make Delhi corruption free. What we did without Full Statehood What we will do after Full Statehood ¨ For the few months that the AAP- ¨ Jan Lokpal Bill: We will promulgate government had control of Delhi's AntiCorruption Branch in 2015, over 30 arrests were made. After BJP-ruled Centre's forceful takeover of the ACB in Delhi, only 5 arrests have been made in the last 3 years. ¨ Within one year of forming government, the AAP government passed the Jan Lokpal Bill in Delhi Assembly. However, the Bill is still pending for the approval of the Central Government. ¨ Delhi government started Doorstep Delivery of government services in Delhi with 40 services; with another 30 services to be added soon. This irst of a kind initiative has not only saved huge time and money of the aam aadmi, but has also curbed petty corruption involved in the delivery of government services. ¨ As per a report by the Central Vigilance Commission in 2017, corruption-related complaints against those in the Delhi government had reduced by 81%. ¨ Due to several initiatives of the Aam Aadmi Party government, the private school ma ia, private hospital ma ia, land ma ia and water ma ia have grown weak and their nexus for corruption has been broken. ¨ AAP government has put a stop to the systematic malpractice and corruption in admission of students belonging to EWS (Economically Weaker Sections) in private schools under RTE act by setting up a centralized admission process through computerized lottery. 19 the Jan Lokpal Bill to give Delhi the most eﬀective Lokpal, who can investigate any government of icer or minister, including the Chief Minister. ¨ Anti Corruption Branch: We will revive the ACB just like we did in the 49 days government and in the irst few months of the present AAP government to break the spine of corruption in Delhi. ¨ Establish Benchmarks: A new citizen's charter shall be created which will list down the actions and conduct of public functionaries that will be deemed as corrupt practice. ¨ Right to time bound delivery of service: We will bring into force a law to guarantee a citizen's right to time bound delivery of public services, failing which heavy penalties will be imposed on erring of icials. Jobs India is a young nation with 65% of the population under 35 years of age. Due to gross mismanagement of our economy, instead of reaping a demographic dividend, the country is headed for demographic disaster. Detrimental schemes of BJP government like demonetization and GST's failed implementation has not only ruined the Small and Medium Enterprises, but has brought the unemployment levels to the highest in the last 45 years. In Delhi, the AAP government has taken a number of progressive steps to provide digni ied employment to the youth. However, because the elected government has illegally been denied control over services by the Central government, about 2 lakh posts in government are lying vacant. What we did without Full Statehood What we will do after Full Statehood ¨ AAP government has organized four ¨ Recruitment for 2 lakh government mega and several small Job Fairs in Delhi which gave employment to over 36,000 youth of Delhi. jobs: We will ill over 2 lakh vacancies in Delhi Police, Education, Health Department etc. within a year with 85% reservation for the youth of Delhi. ¨ To ensure dignity of life for wage earners, the AAP government increased the minimum wages across all categories and of unskilled labourers from Rs 9,500 to Rs 14,000 per months. ¨ Reform DSSSB: We will reform Delhi Subordinate Services Selection Board (DSSSB) as a professionally run body to complete any recruitment process within 6 months of requisition by the Departments. ¨ AAP government has created self- employment opportunities by issuing 10,000 new permits for Auto Rickshaws with special loan support, and by oﬀering a subsidy of Rs 30,000 on purchase of E-Rickshaws, the highest in the country. ¨ Create Delhi Public Service Commission: We will create Delhi's own Public Service Commission within a year for recruitment of State level cadre of civil servants other than those of All India Services. ¨ Over 5,000 new guest teachers have ¨ Entrepreneurship and Digital Skills been recruited and their salaries increased from Rs 22,500 to Rs 36,000 per months. capital: We will establish Delhi as the nation's hub for new-age digital skills and entrepreneurship through setting up of Knowledge Parks and 'Start Up Centers' where entrepreneurs can get inancial assistance, skill trainings, and free space to operate their new businesses. ¨ 4 lakh street vendors have been given a pathway to formalization by irst recognizing their tenure rights, demarcating legally-protected hawking zones, and enabling their integration into formal markets through the Delhi Street Vendor Scheme and Rules. 21 Land and Housing Land in Delhi is under the control of Delhi Development Authority that operated under the Central Government. The fact that close to 2/3rd of the people of Delhi reside in slums and unauthorized colonies shows the colossal failure of the DDA in providing planned housing for the people of Delhi, especially the poor. Unplanned growth has also resulted in poor access to amenities for majority of the residents. Over the past 4 years, DDA has refused to give land for new schools, colleges, clinics, bus depots etc. to meet the essential needs of the people of Delhi. Another major gap is in the way the Master Plan for Delhi is prepared with little public participation. With full statehood, AAP will create an inclusive city where all the citizens enjoy the bene its of world class facilities. What we will do after Full Statehood ¨ Every family of Delhi will own a house: We will enable each family of Delhi to avail a formal pucca house in Delhi within 10 years. The urban poor, who have been the most neglected section by DDA so far, will be given top priority by building houses for bottom 25% of the population. ¨ Regularization of unauthorized colonies: The AAP government will take immediate steps towards regularizing all unauthorized colonies within a year. The government will ensure that residents of unauthorized colonies will have access to all public services and amenities. ¨ Ban on forceful eviction and relocation of slums into far lung areas of Delhi: We will ensure strict compliance to Delhi government's Slum Rehabilitation Policy for Delhi, noti ied in 2017, to prevent forceful eviction and relocation of slum dwellers to far lung areas. ¨ Initiate a Slum Titling Program with the goal of “Jahan Jhuggi, Vahin Makaan”: We will conduct a citywide survey and initiate a slum titling program to regularize slums which exist on safe and tenable lands in order to ensure that economic and social ties of slum dwellers are not disrupted. ¨ Developing a new rental housing strategy for Delhi: We will formulate a new rental housing strategy for Delhi and create new rental housing stock for new migrants, professionals and students in diﬀerent parts of Delhi. ¨ Building world-class recreational spaces and community centres: We will make Delhi a vibrant and culturally stimulating city by developing more parks, libraries, museums, exhibition centres, art galleries, entertainment centres and active public spaces evenly distributed across the city. ¨ Bottom up planning by engaging citizens: We will create an inclusive city by drafting an Aam Aadmi Master Plan for Delhi through widespread public consultation at mohalla level. We will develop Local Area Plans called as Mohalla Plans and establish Plan Monitoring Committees in each mohalla to supervise the implementation of plan. 23 Protection from Sealing BJP-ruled Central government could have stopped the process of sealing by bringing out an ordinance; however they were party to this activity which hit out at the trading community of Delhi. AAP has always stood by the traders and demanded justice for the honest businessmen and traders of Delhi. What we will do after Full Statehood ¨ No more sealing of properties: We will not allow sealing of industries/shops and set up a High-Powered Enquiry Committee to evaluate the cases of shops sealed in the last three years. ¨ Redrafting the Building Bye Laws of Delhi: We will revamp the building bye-laws of Delhi and permit full utilization of existing commercial spaces. As part of the exercise, we will also conduct detailed surveys of existing commercial spaces of Delhi to regularize them. ¨ Increase supply and augment shortage of commercial/ industrial properties: We will create additional commercial spaces in all wards of Delhi and augment the existing shortages in planned and formal commercial and industrial properties. ¨ Noti ication and Regularization of mixed-use streets in Delhi: We will conduct a comprehensive survey of commercial properties in Delhi and immediately notify mixed use streets in Delhi using GIS mapping and online platform for simpli ied form submissions and payments. ¨ Ensuring parking facilities and cleanliness to bene it residents living near mixed use streets: Through levying a nominal conversion charge, we will ensure that each mixed-use street will have provisions for parking and cleanliness, so that the residents of those colonies are not impacted with the commercial activity. ¨ Annual Compliance Mechanism: We will appoint a Nodal Of icer for each ward to prepare an annual compliance statement in order to continuously monitor and ascertain that the Master Plan provisions regarding land use are adhered to. Strict disciplinary action, including suspension from service, shall be taken against colluding Nodal Of icers. 25 Cleanliness To keep Delhi clean is the statutory function of ive diﬀerent municipal bodies which are under the administrative control of Central government. At present, Delhi generates about 14,000 tonnes of solid waste per day, of which only 70-80% is collected while the rest is scattered across the street or in open dump. The Sanitation Department of the municipal bodies is poorly managed with no long-term plan for solid waste management. The level of mismanagement is so high that it fails to even pay the salary of its workers in time leading to frequent strikes resulting in the entire city being turned into be a big dumping ground. With full statehood, the municipal corporations shall be made accountable towards Delhi Government for keeping the city clean. What we will do after Full Statehood ¨ Make Delhi among the cleanest cities in the world: We will exercise administrative supervision and accountability over the municipal bodies in Delhi so that Delhi becomes one of the cleanest cities in the world, similar to London or Singapore, within 5 years. ¨ Ban Open Dhalaos: Open “dhalaos” will be completely banned in Delhi within a year. ¨ Increase waste processing infrastructure: Develop capacity to collect and process about 17,000 tonnes of municipal solid waste per day through public private partnership. ¨ Decentralize waste management: We will establish mohalla-level waste collection, segregation and composting units to be managed in partnership with community and professional organisations. ¨ Incentivise door-to-door collection: We will establish a system of door-to-door collection of garbage from all households and incentivize citizens depositing segregated solid waste by giving free public transport vouchers. ¨ Clean streets every night: We will ensure all streets of Delhi are cleaned every night. 27 Pollution Delhi is facing an environmental crisis with pollution levels signi icantly above safety limits. In March 2018, Delhi government announced a comprehensive 26 point Action Plan under “Green Budget' to address air pollution and increase green cover of Delhi. With full statehood, Delhi government can eﬀectively control all the diﬀerent agencies that play a role in tackling pollution and can undertake a more holistic framework of action plan. However, since pollution emissions from Delhi contribute to only about 30% of the overall air pollution in Delhi and the rest comes from outside Delhi, a regional action plan – particularly one that puts an end to crop burning in NCR – is essential to ind a lasting solution to air pollution. What we did without Full Statehood ¨ Delhi became the irst city in India to What we will do after Full Statehood ¨ 100% Electric Buses: We will undertake successfully implement the Odd-Even scheme as an eﬀective emergency measure to combat air pollution. ¨ Delhi government has committed to add 1000 electric buses – such a commitment for any city in the world outside China. A progressive draft Electric Vehicle Policy has been brought that aims for 25% share of Electric Vehicles in all newly registered vehicles in Delhi within 5 years. all infrastructure enhancements necessary to move Delhi's bus system to 100% electric buses. ¨ Vacuum cleaning of all roads: Vacuum cleaning of all major roads, which is the responsibility of MCDs, will be legally mandated within a year along with other measures to reduce road dust. ¨ Compliance with construction rules: Construction dust is one of the major contributors to air pollution. Strict actions shall be taken to ensure that of icials of DPCC and local bodies who are in-charge of undertaking regular inspections are held accountable for the same. ¨ Large scale plantation programmes have been undertaken resulting in an increase in green cover of Delhi by 1100 hectares since 2015. ¨ With 26 continuous air quality ¨ Promote citizen participation: We will establish citizen committees in every neighbourhood to report violation of rules to manage road or construction dust. Resolution of complaints shall be monitored centrally and strict disciplinary action taken against of icials failing to take timely action. monitoring stations, Delhi has the best air quality monitoring network in the country. A Graded Response Action Plan has been brought into force to ensure real-time response to degrading air quality. ¨ Due to the above set of measures, average pollution in Delhi (PM2.5 and PM10) has reduced by 20% as compared to 2015. 29 Transport Aam Aadmi Party is committed to providing a modern, reliable, aﬀordable and clean public transport system to the people of Delhi, and undertake measures to reduce traf ic congestion. While we have made a historic investment in new buses and sanctioning all 6 corridors of Delhi Metro Phase 4, the BJP government at Centre betrayed the people of Delhi by approving only 3 of the 6 metro corridors. Further expansion of the public transport system is severely constrained due to refusal of DDA to allocate any new land for bus depots and terminals. Non-removal of road encroachments by MCD and poor enforcement of traf ic rules by Delhi Traf ic Police have increased congestion. What we did without Full Statehood ¨ AAP government has initiated procurement of 4000 new buses in Delhi, which will result in 70% increase in the total bus leet of Delhi by 2020. This includes 1000 electric buses – the largest such commitment for any city in the world, outside China. What we will do after Full Statehood ¨ Delhi metro fares to be made aﬀordable: Fares of Delhi metro will be made aﬀordable and concessional passes provided for students and senior citizens. ¨ Uni ied Transport Authority: On the lines of Transport for London, a Uni ied Transport Authority will be created to plan and supervise the entire public transport system of Delhi including metro, buses, last mile connectivity and facilities for cyclists and pedestrians. ¨ Delhi is the irst city in India to oﬀer a Common Mobility Card, ONE card, for seamless travel in Delhi metro and all Delhi's buses. ¨ “Connect Delhi” initiative launched to ¨ Expand bus infrastructure: New bus scienti ically redesign all bus routes in Delhi. depots will be built over 300 acres of land and leet of buses will be increased to 16,000 within 5 years. ¨ With no fare increases in last 4 years, Delhi's buses oﬀer the most aﬀordable ride. ¨ Build modern bus terminals: Modern bus terminals, similar to metro stations, will be built all over Delhi. These will be integrated with commercial retail and of ice space to reduce last mile travel. ¨ Delhi government has initiated streetscaping and re-design of six major PWD roads by landscaping, removing traf ic bottlenecks and providing adequate facilities for pedestrians and cyclists. ¨ Decongest Delhi: We will redesign streets and remove road encroachments in a time bound manner to ensure smooth traf ic low. ¨ Promote non-motorized transport: Provision of adequate and obstruction-free infrastructure for pedestrians, including diﬀerently abled, and cyclists will be made legally mandatory for all road agencies. ¨ Strict enforcement of traf ic rules: Enforcement of traf ic rules in Delhi will be severely strengthened by using technology such as automatic number plate recognition cameras and speed cameras. 31 Yamuna Rejuvenation Delhi is one of the only few cities in the world, which is situated on the banks of a perennially lowing river. The Yamuna attributes to its identity, a long and glorious cultural heritage. A clean Yamuna would not only mean self-reliance & dignity to the people of Delhi, but also create a huge opportunity for employment for the people in Delhi. The involvement of multiple government agencies and bodies in cleaning Yamuna has created many administrative barriers. Full Statehood would ensure an eﬀective centralized control and administration by Delhi government. What we did without Full Statehood What we will do after Full Statehood ¨ 92% of the work under the Interceptor ¨ Align multiple government Sewer Plan to keep the ilth away from the Yamuna has been completed. agencies: After full statehood, Delhi government will establish systems for coordination and alignment between the various government agencies and bodies, so that Yamuna can be transformed just like the River Thames in London or the River Cheonggyecheon in Seoul. ¨ Around 110 MGD of raw sewage has been blocked oﬀ from lowing into the Yamuna. Work is in progress to convert this sewage into usable water through localized Sewage Treatment Plants. ¨ Delhi Jal Board has started the ¨ Create a beautiful riverfront: Under Yamuna Rejuvenation Scheme under which arrangements have been made for the handling of sewage, garbage, leakages etc. Delhi government has allocated Rs 75 crores for this scheme in 2019-20. the River Front Development Plan, a beautiful corridor will be developed alongside Yamuna which would not only play a big role in maintaining Yamuna Eco System but also in creating a big tourist destination for people of Delhi and others. ¨ Built tourism hotspot around Signature Bridge: The area surrounding Signature Bridge will be developed as a tourist destination. A new amusement park will be developed. ¨ Ban unauthorized construction on Yamuna banks: Unauthorized construction will be banned in the areas surrounding Yamuna banks. ¨ Begin Water Ferry Service: As a new mode of public transport, we will begin Water Ferry Service in River Yamuna, in the next ive years. ¨ Develop Ghats: 50 Ghats will be developed on Yamuna Banks which would host evening Aartis in an organized manner. Facilities at Ghats for Chhath puja will be enhanced. 33 Delhi vs Other National Capitals: A Tragedy of Democracy Although all major political parties have consistently demanded full statehood for Delhi since 1951, it is often said that being a national capital, Delhi cannot be granted the status of a full state. However, a simple comparison of the powers of Delhi government and that of the local city governments of major national capitals around the world makes it clear that India has the most regressive form of governance for its national capital. In the table that follows, a comparison of powers of Delhi government has been made with 4 large national capitals – London (U.K.), Berlin (Germany), Moscow (Russia) and Mexico City (Mexico). Comparison has also been made with 2 smaller cities that are national capitals – Washington DC (U.S.) and Ottawa (Canada). Function Local Police Appointment and Transfer of Of icials Land and City Planning Housing Traf ic and Transport Planning Control over local bodies Delhi London Berlin Moscow Mexico City û û û û û û ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü Ottawa Washington DC ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü N.A. N.A. Comparison of powers of Delhi government with other na onal capitals The above comparison makes it clear how the governance system in Delhi stands out as an anomaly to all other national capitals – especially those which are large cities such as London, Berlin, Moscow and Mexico City. Not only does the current governance setup create everyday hurdles in the delivery of basic public services to the people of Delhi, it stands as a blot on the core ideals of democracy that India prides itself on. 34 History of Struggle for Full Statehood of Mr. Madanlal Khurana of BJP. ¨ 1911- Delhi became the capital of British India. It was administered by Chief Commissioner until 1947. ¨ 1998- A draft bill for the full statehood of Delhi was proposed by BJP leader, Mr. Sahib Singh Verma. ¨ 1947- 'Pattabhi Sitaramayya Committee' was set up. It recommended that Delhi be administered by the appointed lieutenant governor on the instructions of the Centre. ¨ 1999- The BJP's manifesto promises to make Delhi a full state. ¨ 2003- The then Deputy Prime Minister Mr. LK Advani introduced a bill for the full state in the Parliament. It was referred to the Standing Committee headed by Mr.Pranab Mukherjee. ¨ 1951- Shri Brahm Prakash became the irst Chief Minister of Delhi. He demanded for the irst time - full statehood for Delhi. ¨ 2014- In the LokSabha elections, BJP's ¨ 1956- By dissolving the Delhi Legislative Delhi unit issued a separate manifesto for Delhi. It promised full statehood for Delhi. Assembly, its command was handed over to the lieutenant governor. ¨ 1987- "Balakrishnan Committee" ¨ 2015- Both the BJP and the Congress, in recommended that there should be a legislative assembly in Delhi. It would have the right to make laws on matters related to state list, except land, police and public order. their respective manifestos for the Delhi Assembly elections, promised full statehood for Delhi. ¨ 2016- Aam Aadmi Party passed a bill in the Delhi Assembly to make Delhi a full state. However, it has not yet been approved by the BJP-ruled Central government. ¨ 1993- Reorganization of Delhi Legislative Assembly took place under the leadership of the elected government Both BJP and Congress have been avoiding the question of full statehood for Delhi. Their reason being that they did not have their government in the Delhi Assembly. The truth is that there have been opportunities when they had their government both at the centre and Delhi Assembly. But they did not take eﬀective steps towards the direction of full statehood for Delhi. Even today, the stance of BJP and Congress has not been favourable towards granting full statehood to Delhi. 35 206, Rouse Avenue, Deen Dayal Upadhyay Marg, ITO, New Delhi Phone: +91 9718500606, Email: contact@aamaadmiparty.org www.aamaadmiparty.org | Facebook: AamAadmiParty | Twitter: @AamAadmiParty
