AAP Manifesto FOR A MODERN, CORRUPTION-FREE AND PROSPEROUS PUNJAB AAM AADMI PARTY HIGHLIGHTS The Aam Aadmi Party Punjab Government will give 'Holy City' status to Amritsar and Sri Anandpur Sahib. Our government will make Punjab corruption-free by passing Jan Lok Pal bill. Complete overhaul of governance and use of technology to eliminate corruption All Maﬁas including transport maﬁa, Reta Bajri Maﬁa, liquor maﬁa, cable maﬁa, controlled by politicians will be dismantled. Contracts shall be given to youth on merit. Top politicians involved in drug trade, selling spurious pesticides and running 'Reta-Bajri' and other maﬁa will be punished and sent to jail. Their properties will be conﬁscated. Property tax will be abolished and Domestic electricity rates up to 400 units will be halved. Free medicines, treatment and diagnostic tests will be made available in every village through 'Pind Sehat Clinics' and Mohalla clinics in towns. Rs 5 lakh cashless health insurance scheme for treatment in private hospitals. Punjab farmers will be Debt-free by December 2018. Punjab will be made drug free within one month of formation of government. Rehabilitation and de-addiction of drug victims within six months. The government will investigate all incidents of religious desecration in last two years and ensure exemplary punishment for the guilty. 25 lakh employment opportunities will be created and Punjabi youth will be made 'job creators' instead of 'job seekers'. Old age, handicapped and widow pensions to be increased from Rs 500 to Rs 2500. Aam Aadmi Canteens in all district and sub divisional towns where clean, wholesome meals will be available for Rs 5. No AAP MLA, minister, MP or any other senior leader will use vehicle with hooters and red beacon lights. VIP culture will be ended by cutting down personal security by 95%. NRI Board will be formed with 24 hour hotline facility to solve all problems faced by NRIs, including VISA problems. AAM AADMI PARTY 01 The Aam Aadmi Party Punjab Government will give 'Holy City' status to Amritsar and Sri Anandpur Sahib. AAM AADMI PARTY AAM AADMI PARTY FREE HEALTHCARE FOR ALL è Under the policy of Universal health care, Rs 5 lakh health insurance for all Punjabis. è 'One time' regularization of nursing homes on 'as is where is' basis by a committee which includes doctors and their associations. The government will simplify existing rules and regulations involving Nursing homes. è Rates for procedures set under various government insurance schemes will be reviewed and private sector will be invited to participate in public health care in a mutually beneﬁcial manner. è Three New Medical Colleges with training for Nursing and Para-Medical will be established. The existing three medical colleges will be upgraded by increasing their seats. Fees of private medical colleges will be rationalized. è As mentioned in the youth manifesto, All doctors, nurses and all paramedical staﬀ will get full pay during the probation period. è Provisions of Nursing Home Protection Act will be strictly implemented to protect doctors and their property. è All vacant posts of doctors, nurses, paramedical staﬀ and technicians will be ﬁlled and new posts will be created to fulﬁll 'AAP's 'FREE Health for All'. è Those practicing "traditional forms of medicine" in villages will be registered as Health Workers after training. AAM AADMI PARTY 02 EMPLOYMENT è Make Punjab corruption-free and restore faith of the industry in the credibility of State and its Government. AAP government will launch a massive drive to root out corruption from all levels of administration and restore the credibility of the Government of Punjab and the prestige of State of Punjab as the pre-eminent destination for setting up businesses, industry and trade. To this end, the anticorruption investigation and enforcement wings of the government including the Lokayukt shall be given greater powers and autonomy so that Punjab becomes a corruption-free State. è 25 lakh jobs and employment opportunities will be created in next ﬁve years. Our endeavour is to make the Punjab youth 'job creators' instead of 'job seekers'. The AAP Government will create employment and entrepreneurship opportunities in both rural and urban areas. è Entrepreneurship and Skilling Centres (ESC) in every block. AAP Government will set up 147 Entrepreneurship and Skilling Centers, one in each block. Special emphasis will be on Agriculture and Allied industries i.e. Food Processing, Dairy Farming, Horticulture, Maize & Cotton related Industries etc. è Punjab Launch Pad Hubs (Incubators) in 10 major cities of Punjab. Incubation Centres called Punjab Launch Pads will be set up in 10 major cities of Punjab namely Mohali, Batala, Pathankot, Ludhiana, Patiala, Jalandhar, Bathinda, Hoshiarpur, Ferozepur and Amritsar. This will help the youth of Punjab to turn their dreams of becoming innovators and entrepreneurs into reality with access to technology, infrastructure, ﬁnance, industry mentors and market opportunities being provided at the Launch Pads. è Foreign Employment Youth Board with 5 branches in Jalandhar, Amritsar, Mohali, Ludhiana and Sangrur will be created to advise and train youth for foreign jobs in collaboration with embassies and missions of foreign countries. The board will also set up training institutes to help the youth prepare for tests like IELTS, PTE, etc. è Punjab Overseas Employment Corporation Punjab Overseas Employment Corporation will be set up to promote employment of Punjab youth overseas. This will work in conjunction with the Foreign Employment Youth Board. è Kanshi Ram Youth Skill University in Doaba region. A Skill University called the AAM AADMI PARTY 03 EMPLOYMENT 'Kanshi Ram Youth Skill University' will be set up in Doaba Region, with two regional campuses in Malwa and Majha. The university will conduct advanced studies in skill development and train the trainers who will run skilling programs in Punjab. è Free Wi-ﬁ hot-spots in all villages, cities and government colleges. Free Wi-ﬁ hot-spots will be created in all villages, cities and government colleges. This will provide connectivity to hundreds of thousands of youth in both rural and urban areas. è Abolition of Maﬁa Raj. AAP Government will root out the maﬁa raj from government contracts. No MP, MLA, Minister and their direct relatives will be eligible for government contracts. Youth will be preferred for the award of government contracts. The existing system wherein Thekas of all kinds, be it liquor vends, sand and bajri contracts, parking lots, canteens or transport permits are cornered by the cartels controlled by either political houses directly or by their proxies, will be dismantled. A high level probe will be ordered to look into all previous allotments and alteration in the policies for unlawful gains at the cost of the state exchequer. è Mata Gujri Training Academy for Girls Mata Gujri Training Academy for Girls will be opened to equip girls for recruitment into state and central police forces, BSF and paramilitary forces. This will be the ﬁrst of its kind of academy to train and educate the young women of Punjab to enter the police and paramilitary forces. AAP believes that only strong women make a strong nation. è Creation of Micro Finance Industry The AAP Government will create micro ﬁnance industry on a large scale. State Finance Corporation will be revived and through appropriate regulatory framework an enabling environment for private micro ﬁnance players shall be created. è Abolition of Application Fee There will be no application fee for applying to government jobs (currently fees range from Rs.500/- to Rs.3000/-). Job Qualifying Exam Centers will also be created in every district headquarter to make them easily accessible to job seekers from far ﬂung areas. Interviews will be abolished and selection to be purely on academic merit to root out sifarish and graft. è Full Pay during Probation Period The Aam Aadmi Party will stop the current AAM AADMI PARTY 04 EMPLOYMENT system of employing doctors, teachers and other professionals in government services on basic pay only. Employment will be as per grade pay and probation period will be rolled back to the earlier system of two years. In addition, 1.25 lakh vacant government jobs will be ﬁlled up. è Demands of Unemployed Youth to be considered Demands of all youth organizations who have requisite skills but have been forced to go on agitational path because of government's unjust and erroneous policies, will be considered. ANTI-DRUGS CAMPAIGN è Drugs Supply Chain will be annihilated within one month Drugs Supply Chain will be annihilated within one month of forming the government. The process of rehabilitation of drug victims will start immediately in order to produce signiﬁcant results within 6 months. A special Drug Task Force to be created within Punjab Police at State and district levels to crackdown on sale and supply of drugs and high level investigation will be launched to investigate the involvement of politicians and police oﬃcers in drug trade. Guilty will be sent to jail and their properties conﬁscated. è False cases foisted on the people of Punjab by the Akali Dal-BJP to be withdraw All politically motivated and false cases including fabricated NDPS cases will be withdrawn. Action will be taken against guilty policemen and politicians for implicating the youth of Punjab in false cases. è Round the Clock Anti-Drug Toll-Free Number. A round the clock anti-drug toll- free number will be started where people may sting and report on drug dealers to the government. This will make every person of Punjab an anti-drug dealer inspector and put fear in the drug supply chain. è Special Law to give Life Imprisonment till Death for Guilty Drug Dealers Special law will be enacted to give life imprisonment till death for drug dealers after being found guilty. Assets of all such convicts would be seized and auctioned. è Facilitate post-treatment rehabilitation of drug users. Facilitate post-treatment rehabilitation of drug users to prevent relapse which is a major challenge. AAM AADMI PARTY 05 ANTI-DRUGS CAMPAIGN ð Trade and Industry will be incentivized in diﬀerent ways to encourage it to give jobs to rehabilitated drug addicts. This step aims to bring victims of the drug trade back into the mainstream and enable them to lead a normal life. ð All drug rehabilitated victims after due treatment will be guaranteed admissions in government educational institutions and sport academies, according to their eligibility. è Free De-Addiction Treatment in all Government De-Addiction and Rehabilitation Centres. Free de-addiction treatment will be provided in all government deaddiction and rehabilitation centres. Methods of de-addiction in all government and private de-addiction centres will regulated and standardized. There will also be a cap on the fees charged by private de-addiction and rehabilitation centres. è Trained Psychiatrists to be Appointed. Trained Psychiatrists required for rehabilitation of drug addicts will be hired to man all drug rehabilitation centres. è Local Body and Panchayat Election Candidates to Compulsorily Sign a Drug Free Aﬃdavit. All candidates contesting Local Body and Panchayat elections will have to compulsorily sign an aﬃdavit declaring themselves to be drug free. We will also campaign for appropriate changes in the Representation of People's Act (Central Government legislation) to make it mandatory for the assembly and parliamentary election candidates to also sign similar aﬃdavits. è Random Mandatory Drug Tests for Election Candidates at the Time of Filing Nominations. Random mandatory drug tests of blood and urine samples for election candidates will be conducted at the time of ﬁling of nominations in the presence of DC and CMO of the district so that elected representatives lead by example in creating a statewide anti-addiction temperament and environment. è Modern Pendu Sehat Clinic in Every Village. Every village will have a modern Pendu Sehat Clinic, with availability of a doctor, free medicines and free of charge diagnostic tests. è “School of Addiction Studies” to be Set Up. A “School of Addiction Studies” will be set up which would award bachelors and masters in addiction studies to about 150 students a year. This would be a ﬁrst in Asia and will be modelled on the lines of Hazeldon Graduate School of Addiction Studies, USA. AAM AADMI PARTY 06 EDUCATION è Education will be the Top-Most Priority. Education will be the top-most priority of the AAP government. AAP will make a substantial increase in Education Budget, on the lines of AAP's Delhi model. è Make all Government Educational Institutions better than Private Counterparts. We are committed to making all government educational institutions - schools, colleges & Universities - better than private counterparts in infrastructure and teaching quality. The Aam Aadmi Party wishes to make government schools and colleges the ﬁrst choice of students and parents. è Free Bus Travel Facility for Students. Free bus travel facility for all school and college students will be provided. Students will be given 'Sikhia Card' to avail this facility. For college-going students, the government will run buses with CCTV Cameras. è Exclusive bus services for girls and women students will be started. SCHOOL EDUCATION è CCTV cameras in every Government School. CCTV cameras will be installed in government schools so that the parents can monitor their wards while at school at any point of time. è Free Laptops on Admission to 9th Class. On admission to 9th class, students will be given free laptops at the beginning of the session, under the Chief Minister's Student Beneﬁt Scheme. è 29,000 Vacant Posts of School Teachers to be Filled. All 29,000 vacant posts of school teachers in primary, middle and secondary schools will be ﬁlled up. è Every Primary School to have at least 5 Teachers. Every primary school in the state will have at least 5 teachers - one teacher each for English, Punjabi, Hindi, Maths and Physical Education, instead of the current single or two teacher schools. è Introduce Skill Development from Class 9 onwards. Skill Development and Career Counselling will be introduced in government schools from class 9 onwards. AAM AADMI PARTY 07 SCHOOL EDUCATION è Higher Education Scholarship Scheme for Meritorious Girls. In addition to the existing schemes, Higher Education Scholarship Scheme for meritorious girls, passing class 10 with distinction (above 85 per cent), will be provided up to the level of post graduation. è Teachers will be Empowered and Tasked only for Teaching. Teachers will be empowered and tasked only for teaching so that they can give their best to the students. No other government work will be given to them. Estate Managers will be appointed in all government schools for administrative and other jobs like provision of clean drinking water and toilets, maintenance of playground, working lights and fans etc. A total of 3861 Estate Managers - one for ﬁve schools - will be appointed. è Annual Audit of all Private Education Institutions. All private education institutions in Punjab will have a mandatory annual audit for greater transparency in their functioning. Private schools will be disciplined and a stop will be put on the arbitrary and unreasonable fee hike. è Facilities for Diﬀerently-Abled Children. Buildings of educational institutions will be made friendly towards “diﬀerently-abled children”. Admission to such children will NOT be denied, unless a doctor certiﬁes otherwise. è Complete Modernization of the Syllabi of the Punjab School Education Board with special focus on exposure to trade and industry will be done so that education becomes job and market oriented. è All High Schools to have Hi-Tech Computer Labs All High and Senior Secondary Schools will have fully equipped computer labs. è Curb the Exploitation of Private School Teachers. Our government will enact a law to end exploitation of teachers in many non-government schools to ensure quality teaching in private schools too. HIGHER EDUCATION è Higher Education Guarantee Scheme. To ensure that no child is deprived of higher education for want of money, AAP will introduce Higher Education Guarantee Scheme on the Delhi pattern to provide education loans up to Rs 10 lakhs against government guarantee. Only conﬁrmed admission in a college would be needed to avail the loan. AAM AADMI PARTY 08 HIGHER EDUCATION è Eminence to Genuine Educationalists. Appointment of all Vice Chancellors, Professor and Lecturers will be depoliticized and jobs given to eminent educationalists. è Residential Hostels for Students and Working Professionals è New Colleges to be set up: ð Three New Medical Colleges with training for Nursing and Para-Medical will be established. The existing three medical colleges will be upgraded by increasing their seats. ð The government will establish two new Rural Institutes of Higher Learning (Engineering/ Management) – purely for rural students, in addition to the one in Talwandi Sabo. These will be in partnership with NRIs and a Corpus will be created for their smooth running. These will be set up in Gurdaspur and Ferozepur. ð Two new Degree Colleges in Barnala and Pathankot. ð One Hospitality and Hotel Management College to be opened in Ludhiana. ð An Institute for Film and Media will be established in Mohali to cater to the increasing interest of Punjabi youth in ﬁlm and television industry. è Revision in Curriculum of Professional Education Institutes. Curriculum of engineering and technology colleges in Punjab will be revised to match international standards. Curriculum of all Management, Pharma and B.Ed colleges will also be restructured. è Working of Constituent Colleges. All Constituent Colleges working under various Universities in Punjab will be taken over and run as government colleges. SPORTS è “Punjab Olympic Mission” and Mass Sports Movement “Punjab Olympic Mission” to be launched in 2017, to motivate and encourage Punjab sportspersons to earn laurels for the state. ð Towards this end, 500 talented sports students will be identiﬁed from schools each year. They will be adopted by the State and provided world AAM AADMI PARTY 09 SPORTS class training and other facilities free of cost (specialized coaching, diet, equipment etc) throughout their sporting career. ð Sports facilities will be created in each school, college, village and city for competitive and recreational sports. ð To kick-start the sports movement, league matches will be held and coaches will be made available at all levels from block upwards. è Budget for Sports will be increased. Budget for Sports will be increased substantially. è Reward for Medal Winners to be increased. Prize Money for excellence in international and national events, including Olympics, will be made better than any other Indian state. For Olympic winners of gold, silver and bronze medals, prize money will be hiked to Rs 5, 4 and 3 crores respectively, instead of Rs 1 crore, 50 lakh and 25 lakh currently. Additionally, requisite increase of prize money for all other competitions, including participation in national games, will be done. S.No. Competition Reward (Gold) Reward (Silver) Reward (Bronze) 1 Olympics 5 crore 4 crores 3 crores 2 Asian 3 crore 2 crores 1 crore 3 Commonwealth 1 crore 0.75 crores 0.50 crores 4 World Cup (4 yr) 1 crore 0.75 crores 0.50 crores è Establish Sports University. AAP will establish a Sports University with international sports facilities. Three Sports Colleges - one each in every region (Majha, Malwa & Doaba) – will be set up. In addition to the existing two sports schools in Doaba and Malwa regions, one more sports school will be set up in the Majha region. AAM AADMI PARTY 10 FARMERS & FARM LABOURERS è Re-enactment of the Sir Chhotu Ram Act of 1934 (Moneylenders' Debt). ð Under no circumstances will the sum of interest payable exceed the principal amount. ð All debts where a farmer has paid a sum twice the amount of the principal shall be deemed to be wholly discharged. ð Every property mortgaged by a debtor whose debt is deemed to be discharged shall stand released. ð No indebted farmer shall be dispossessed of his Land Holdings & House. ð The interest rate payable on the debt shall be "Bank Base Rate Plus 1 per cent." ð All loans, big or small, shall be covered under the Act. ð All private moneylenders shall be registered; borrowers shall be issued passbooks. è Loan "Waive Oﬀ Plan" For Bank Debts. ð Loans of Poor Farmers & Farm Labourers will be waived oﬀ; Loans of SCs and BCs will also be waived oﬀ. ð Interest on Loans of Other Farmers will be waived oﬀ. ð Punjab Farmers to be Debt Free by December 2018. ð No coercive recovery proceedings against farmers will be launched till December 2018 when they will be debt free. ð A Bank Debt Settlement Committee will be formed to work out the modalities of the "Waive Oﬀ Plan". The Committee will negotiate with banks in order to bring parity of Farmers with Corporate Houses for purpose of settlement of loans. è Making up Crop Loss: Compensation of Rs 20,000 per acre for crop loss due to drought, ﬂoods, pest attack, unseasonal rain, etc.; In the event of crop failure, Farm Labourers shall be given a compensation of Rs 10,000 for every month of loss of work. AAM AADMI PARTY 11 FARMERS & FARM LABOURERS è Proper Crop Price: Minimum Support Price of "Cost plus 50 percent" & Full Implementation of Swaminathan Commission Report on crop pricing by December 2020. è Return of SYL Land: Re-registration of Land acquired for the Satluj Yamuna Link (SYL) Canal by Congress and Shiromani Akali Dal governments earlier, in the name of original owners; Set-Up Water Regulatory Authority to protect and conserve the water of Punjab. è Instant Crop Payment: Lifting of farm produce within 24-hours after reaching Mandi and full payment to farmers within 72 hours of the purchase. è 12-Hour Power for Farmers: It will be ensured that farmers get 12-hours of Free Electricity for farming - no electricity bills on "motors". è Shagan at Birth & Wedding: Shagan of Rs 51,000 within one week of wedding of the daughter of a Farmer/ Farm Labour; Shagan deposit of Rs 21,000 in a bank account in the name of a newly born daughter born to a Farmer/ Farm Labour. è Free Medical Facilities: Modern "Pind Sehat Clinic" (Village Clinic) in every village; Free Medical Treatment in Govt. hospitals & cashless treatment up to Rs 5 Lakh per year in private hospitals for every farmer, farm labourer & his family; All diagnostic tests, medicines and complete treatment shall be free at Pind Sehat Clinics and Government Hospitals for Farmers and Farm Labour. è Education Loans for children: Collateral-free education loan of Rs 10 lakh for children of Farmers and Farm Labourers. è Jail for Corrupt Akali Ministers: High-level and time-bound Inquiries will be initiated against Agriculture Minister, Tota Singh, Food & Civil Supplies Minister, Adesh Pratap Singh Kairon, Revenue Minister, Bikram Singh Majithia, Rural Developments and Panchayats Minister, Sikandar Singh Maluka and others, besides their cahoots who allegedly amassed properties and diverted money from schemes/ grants earmarked for farmers; Such properties will be conﬁscated and the guilty jailed in accordance with the law. è Canal Water: Revival of Canal System in the State, besides construction, of canals in areas deprived so far, including Kandi belt; Irrigation Department will be made free of Corruption. è Diversiﬁcation Push: ð Tax-free Holiday for Agri-units: The mainstay of the diversiﬁcation AAM AADMI PARTY 12 FARMERS & FARM LABOURERS programme will be setting up of clusters of Agro-industrial units in speciﬁc areas which will get a 10-Year Tax Holiday, interest free loans for units employing at least 80 per cent work force from Punjab. Requisite Marketing Infrastructure for Agro-industrial produce will be established. ð Price Assurance: To promote diversiﬁcation diﬀerential amount between MSP and market rate for Maize, Basmati and Pulses (Dals) shall be paid to farmers. è Govt. Warehouses: Modern Cold Chain Infrastructure in all 20 major Fruit & Vegetable Markets; Government-run cold storages in all 22 districts. è Agri Export: To provide a big boost to agriculture exports, State-of-the-art Perishable Cargo Centres will be established at International Airports at Amritsar and Mohali. è Farmer Problems & Awareness: Free wi-ﬁ in every village to give farmers latest information & knowledge. All vacant posts of Agriculture and Horticulture Development Oﬃcers, besides Soil Conservation Oﬃcers will be ﬁlled up; "Kisan Mittar" will be appointed in each village to disseminate agriculturerelated information to farmers. è Revival of Sugarcane: Modernization and Expansion of nine Cooperative Sugar Mills; remunerative price for sugarcane; all farmer arrears will be cleared; henceforth payments to sugarcane farmers within 7 days. è Boosting Cooperative Movement: Cooperative Societies will be freed from political interference; there will be independent auditing of Cooperative Societies; Incentives to successful multi-purpose societies; Increase in plant and machinery subsidy for Farmers Cooperative Societies from 40 to 60 percent. è Farmer Litigation: Fast Track Courts to dispose of all pending land related litigations of farmers within 2 years; all false cases lodged against farmers and farm labourers by the SAD-BJP Government shall be withdrawn; revenue teams in each village to deal with partition ("takseem") of agricultural land between heirs in time-bound manner. Use of technology for accurate mapping of all agricultural land. è Crackdown on spurious products: Life Imprisonment for those involved in manufacture & sale of spurious pesticides, insecticides & spurious milk and their properties shall be conﬁscated. AAM AADMI PARTY 13 FARMERS & FARM LABOURERS è Farmer Suicides: Rs 5 lakh and a Government job for every eligible adult member of the families aﬀected by farmer suicides in the past 10 years. è Private push to Markets: Large scale private investment in Markets and Processing Centres in every district where farmers will sell their produce; rural entrepreneurs shall get same beneﬁts as industrial & IT Start-ups. è Best Price for Farmer: APMC Act shall be amended to allow farmers to sell their produce to buyers & markets of their choice in and outside the state. è Realistic Pension: Old Age Pension shall be increased from Rs 500 to Rs 2000. è Atta Dal for more: A total of 10 lakh more families shall be covered under Atta Dal Scheme. è Punjab will be declared a Dairy State: 25,000 new dairy farms through various incentives like Interest free loans & subsidised electricity; Inter-state movement of cattle for dairy and agricultural purposes will be facilitated and certiﬁcation of such cattle will be done only by veterinary doctors; State Milk Pricing Board shall be set-up; free veterinary treatment for cattle at govt hospitals. è Farm Labs: To ensure best productivity, testing facilities will be provided to farmers. ð Laboratories will be established at block level for free testing of test agricultural soil, seeds and insecticides. ð Two Food Testing Laboratories to be established in the state. è Border Areas: Compensation of Rs 10, 000 per acre for land beyond the fence on IB; settle all arrears of compensation. è Wild Animal Menace: Subsidy for fencing to farms aﬀected by wild animals in Kandi Belt. è Loans to landless: Collateral free loan of Rs 2 lakhs for landless labourers to start business activity. è Stray Cattle Shelters: Village Panchayats/ Gram Sabhas will be provided grants to set up Stray Cattle Shelters to deal with the menace of stray animals. Such Shelters will be incentivised to set up bio-gas plants for use by the villagers. AAM AADMI PARTY 14 TRADE & INDUSTRY è Trade, industry and transport sectors will be made corruption free. "Inspector Raj" and "Raid Raj" will be eliminated. No "Goonda Tax" to be allowed. Selfcertiﬁcation regime for all NOCs and consents in businesses. è Tax regime will be simpliﬁed and transparent. VAT and other taxes will be reduced on Delhi pattern. In ﬁve years, Punjab will have the lowest tax rate. One time settlement of pending tax related cases. VAT refund to be expedited. è Workable and responsive Single Window System for approvals and clearances for all types of industry including real estate. Special impetus to new industry, including IT. è Revival of sick units in Mandi Gobindgarh, Ludhiana, Jalandhar, Amritsar, Batala, Pathankot, Nangal, Bathinda and all other industrial towns will be ensured in a time-bound manner through a series of measures, including two-year tax holiday. Special package to bring back industry that ﬂed the state. è To kickstart industrial revival, un-utilised lands in under-developed Industrial Estates, Growth Centres and Focal Points will be allotted to industry at aﬀordable rates and/ or lease. è Electricity Tariﬀ will be substantially reduced by nailing corruption and enabling optimum eﬃciency of systems. Anti-Punjab Power Agreements with private plants will be reviewed and those responsible for burdening the people of the state will be punished. è A new industrial township with special incentives will be developed in Ropar to kickstart state-of-the-art environment-friendly IT and other industry to generate employment in the backward Kandi belt adjoining Himachal Pradesh. è Unauthorised colonies to be regularised, provided all basic facilities including sewerage within a mandated period. Real Estate sector to be be revived by a series of incentives, review of stamp duty, EDC, CLU, and other charges. è A comprehensive real estate policy will review distortion of master plans and revive the housing sector in consultation with all stakeholders. Uniformity in regulations and coordination between all government development agencies, like PUDA, GLADA, GMADA, Improvement Trusts, Municipal Corporations etc. will be ensured. AAM AADMI PARTY 15 TRADE & INDUSTRY è Elimination of Reta-Bajri Maﬁa in Punjab; mining licences to young entrepreneurs. SIT to unearth collection of "Goonda Tax" through Akali-BJP & Congress collusion. è A 10-year tax Holiday for Agro-based food processing and other industry. Interest free loans for agro-units employing at least 80 per cent work force from Punjab. Units in rural areas related to food processing, dairy products, maize and cotton etc set up by local entrepreneurs will be given incentives. è Transport sector will be depoliticised. AAP government will snatch bus permits from Badals, top politicians of the SAD-BJP, Congress and others who have procured them through fraudulent means and give them to unemployed youth, ex-servicemen, handicapped persons, terrorist victims, and victims of 1984 anti-Sikh violence. è Trucking will be freed of corruption and harassment by DTOs and Police through unnecessary checking of vehicles will cease within two weeks of forming the government. Control of politicians in truck unions will be ended. Issuance of HTV and taxi permits in all districts instead of just Muktsar Sahib as of now. è Heavy "Toll Tax" charged by private companies in collusion with Akali–BJP, Congress politicians will be investigated, reviewed and rationalised. No toll plazas on roads other than highways. Will press for removal of all toll plazas of NHAI on Jalandhar-Amritsar and Ropar-Anandpur Sahib section due to their status as holy cities in accordance with the Centreʼs policy to remove selective toll plazas. è Liquor maﬁa will be dismantled and replaced with an alternate system that provides equal opportunity and generates employment. Control of politicians and their henchmen will be ended in the liquor business. è Five-year tax holiday for Women to encourage women entrepreneurs. è Small retailers will be protected from FDI in retail and mega malls. A "special cell" will look into complaints of harassment of and extortion from rice sheller owners, artiyas, jewellers, and small retailers by food inspectors, police, taxation oﬃcials etc. è Religious, heritage and industrial tourism will be encouraged with liberal tax incentives to hotels and related industry. Exhibition halls will be set up in Ludhiana, Jalandhar, Amritsar and Patiala in PPP-model. AAM AADMI PARTY 16 TRADE & INDUSTRY è Social security for tax-paying small and medium businessmen and traders who suﬀer losses and face insolvency. è While there will be zero-toleration on food adulteration, systems will be put in place to check unfair harassment of retailers. Testing laboratories for food safety will be set up in all districts. è In order to end harassment of "rehriwalas" and "fariwallahs", spaces will be earmarked in every city for creation of "rehri" markets and week-end ﬂea markets. DALITS è Houses for all Dalits : A low cost housing scheme for dalits to ensure that all members of the community have a pucca house. Registration of all kutcha and pucca houses of Dalits to enable them to take loans and other beneﬁts including compensation for damage due to natural calamities. è Auction of village common land reserved for dalits to inﬂuential persons of other castes by proxy will be stopped and illegal control by people of other castes will be freed. Land will be given to cooperative societies of dalits formed for this purpose. Wherever people do not opt for a cooperative society a ﬁve-member committee of dalits in each village will approve the auction. Government tubewells will be made on village common land reserved for Dalits and there will be a provision in cooperative societies to provide free use of tractors and implements for cultivating these lands. è The Punjab Scheduled Caste Commission will be empowered, strengthened and expanded to ensure that grievances of dalits are taken seriously and discrimination of any kind against Dalits is punished. This includes making dalits work extra hours, exploitation in grant of pension or other beneﬁts due to political aﬃli- ation, not giving them minimum wages, etc. The Commission will have one dalit representative from each district. è A special cell will be created to monitor proper implementation of Post Matric AAM AADMI PARTY 17 DALITS Scholarship scheme, and there will be a time bound enquiry to identify those who have looted money meant for Dalits under the scheme and to punish the guilty. è A special SIT will ﬁx responsibility and recommend exemplary punishment for atrocities and false cases registered against Dalits in last ﬁve years. è Backlog of job vacancies for Dalits will be cleared. A committee will be formed in each department to identify and ﬁll the vacancies. è Collateral free loan of Rs 2 lakhs will be given to start small businesses or village based enterprises to enable poor members of the community to earn a digniﬁed living. è It will be made mandatory for all educational institutions, government and private oﬃces and NGOs to have a complaint oﬃce to deal with discrimination against Dalits. Special Dalit committees in every block to inform people of beneﬁts available for them and to register complaints of corruption and harassment by government staﬀ responsible for delivery of welfare schemes. è In the event of crop failure, farm labourers shall be given a compensation of Rs 10,000 for every month of loss of work. Job cards under MGNREGA will be made on priority for Dalits and more work areas will be identiﬁed for the scheme. è Amount under Shagun scheme will be increased to Rs 51,000. Old age pen- sion, widow pension and handicapped pension will be increased from Rs 500 to Rs 2000. Everyone will be eligible for old age pension at the age of 58 years. è Modern Pind Sehat Clinic in every village. Every village will have a modern Pind Sehat Clinic with availability of doctor, free medicines and free of charge diagnostic tests as provided in Delhi by AAP Government. Rs 5 lakh health insur- ance scheme will be introduced. è The AAP government will have a Social Security Scheme for all Dalits. è Higher education guarantee scheme. To ensure that no child is deprived of higher education for want of money, the AAP will introduce Higher Education Guarantee Scheme on Delhi pattern to provide education loans up to Rs 10 lakh against government guarantee. Only conﬁrmed admission in a college would be needed to avail the loan. Kanshi Ram Skill University in Doaba Region to conduct advanced studies in skill development and train the trainers who will run skilling programs in Punjab. AAM AADMI PARTY 18 DALITS è Free education for poor Dalit girls up to plus two and free skill training subsequently. Poor Dalit students will get free accommodation and food in the residential hostels for students and working professionals in all districts. No admission charges for Dalit students in government schools. è Special ﬁnancial incentives will be given to workers who are engaged in cleaning jobs in municipalities and government departments. Arrangements/pits will be made to dispose cow dung and other waste from Dalit households situated in rural areas. è Complete scrutiny of all BPL ration cards for atta dal scheme, will be done to ensure that beneﬁts reach the deserving. Clean drinking water, sewage facilities and electricity will be provided to all Dalit Colonies in a time bound manner. è A separate Commisison will be established for Denotiﬁed Tribes (Vimukta Jati) like Sansi, Bauaria, Bazigar, Barad, Bangali, Nat and Gandhila to look into their demands. A special Board will work for their up-liftment, create settlements to ensure low cost pucca houses for all people from these nomadic tribes and ensure school education for their children. è There will be provision for reservation in State Boards and Corporations for Dalits like in government departments. è All existing subsidies/welfare schemes extended to Dalit families will be further strengthened. Free gas connection, including burner/stove, will be provided to all Dalit families. Free electricity units for Dalit families will be increased to 400 from the existing 200. BACKWARD CLASSES è Fully Empower BC Commission to act in favour of BC community. Present BC Commission in Punjab is mere a white elephant without any power. è Issuing Life-long BC certiﬁcate BC community face harassment to get BC certiﬁcate after three years, in AAP government BC certiﬁcate will be issued for whole life. è Clearing Backlog of BCs in all departments in time bound manner. è Pakka Houses will be provided to all homeless BCs. è To resolve all problems and demands of BC community a committee of experts will be formed. AAM AADMI PARTY 19 SENIOR CITIZENS è Old age pension for senior citizens will be increased to Rs 2500/month. è Special plan will be introduced for free Medical Care of senior citizens. è Maintenance and welfare of parents and senior citizens Act will be implemented in its true spirit. è Action plan for protection of life and liberty of senior citizens will be implemented. è Old age homes for senior citizens will be ensured in each district. WOMEN è 33% reservation for women in jobs. Women employees will preferably be posted in their home district. è Salaries of Anganwadi workers/helpers, Asha workers and Mid day meal helpers salaries will be doubled. Women hostels in every district. è Special Police wing to crack down on menace of 'Holiday brides' and domestic abuse. è Suraksha button on every mobile phone with emergency connectivity with Punjab Police via Wi-Fi. è Special Fund for women and children of victims of domestic violence and abuse. Money to be adjusted against maintenance granted by courts and will be recovered from husbands or those responsible for paying. è 100,000 (one lakh) toilets for women in public spaces. è Swift and eﬀective justice in Crimes Against Women. Fast track courts to be built and made functional. è Women employees will be given child care leave and provided crèche facilities at the work place. AAM AADMI PARTY 20 EX-SERVICEMEN è The 13% reservation quota for Ex-Servicemen in various groups of state government jobs will be ﬁlled and backlog of vacancies will be ﬁlled on priority. Principle of 'equal pay for equal work' will be followed and implementation of Private Security Agency Regulation Act 2005 will be simpliﬁed to end harassment of ESM seeking employment in Punjab. è Exemption from toll tax for all ESM. Free bus passes for War Widows and Veer Naaris. Taxes on all CSD items will be reduced. è Punjab Security Corps will be formed with lateral induction of ex-servicemen into security, traﬃc management and related jobs in the government. è Punjab State Defence Commission headed by a senior retired Defence oﬃcer will be established to facilitate resolution of ESM grievances. Nodal oﬃcers of the rank of SP in SSP Oﬃce and of the rank of ADC in DC Oﬃce reporting to the Commission, will be set up in each district to redress ESM issues. Self attestation by ESM for arms licence above JCO level. è All widows of 1962, 1965 and 1971 wars will be given 10 acres of land or compensation according to average collector rate as per HC order of May 2015. è Cash grants for gallantry award winners or their next of kin will be the highest in the country - Rs 5 crores for Param Vir Chakra, Rs 3 crores for Mahavir Chakra and Rs 2 crores for Vir Chakra awardees. In addition, the state government will give a cash assistance of Rs 1 crore to families and a government job to NOK of defence martyrs from Punjab. Martyrs will be given recognition in their villages/ towns by erecting suitable memorials or naming roads after them. è ESM recruited by the state government will be given a two year exemption to pass Punjabi exam. They will be exempted from contributing to Employees State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) if they are already members of ECHS. è AAP is committed to give complete support to OROP without any riders AAM AADMI PARTY 22 POLICE REFORMS è No political interference in the functioning of Punjab Police. è Overtime contract system will end without reducing present pay. Eight-hours shift regime will be introduced. è A committee will be formed to recommend major reforms to improve welfare, working conditions of Punjab Police Personnel. GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES è AAP Government will implement the 6th Pay commission report in letter and spirit. A committee will look into the pay parity issues. è All contractual employees will be regularized. A committee will be formed to review minimum wages in Punjab. è Salaries of Anganwadi workers/ helpers, Asha workers and midday meal helpers will be doubled. è "Old Pension Scheme" stopped in 2004 will be revived. Probation period will be reduced to 1 year; full salary during probation. è Employees of all boards and corporations will get pension from public exchequer like other government employees. All posts falling vacant by retiring staﬀ will be ﬁlled by 31st March as per government guidelines. è Transparent Transfer Policy will be formed for government employees with focus on zero corruption and no political interference. Preference will be given to women for postings in their home districts. è All aided school teachers will be treated on par with government teachers. è Lambardars - Traditional lambardari system to continue with a stipend of Rs 3000 a month and chowkidar Rs 2000 a month. è PICTES computer teachers will be absorbed into the government. è All government departments will have a grievance redressal committee which will meet on the 1st Monday of every month. All employee unions and protesting employees will be invited to participate in the same. Departmental Lok Adalts will be arranged. AAM AADMI PARTY 23 GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES è Complete review of implementation of the Right to Service Act through Suvidha Kendras to eliminate delay in services, high rate and complaints of Kendra employees. DIFFERENTLY-ABLED è Pension will be raised (up to Rs 2500) and directly transferred into bank accounts of the physically challenged . Minimum income condition for pension eligibility will be increased from Rs 12,000 per annum to Rs one lakh per annum, on the Delhi Government pattern. è For pension purposes, level of disability will be reduced from 50 to 40 per cent. Bedridden patients will be provided necessary kit, including wheel chair. Each physically challenged bed-ridden person will be provided a 'Caretaker” allowance of Rs 5,000 per month. è Backlog of jobs for handicapped persons will be ﬁlled within one year. One lakh handicapped will be skilled and provided livelihood on priority during the next ﬁve-years. è Land registration fee for handicapped will be reduced, as in case of women. One-time compensation to “khet mazdoor” and farmers suﬀering handicap will be enhanced from Rs 30,000 to Rs 1 lakh. è A specially equipped wing for handicapped will be set up in all hostels for students and professionals in every district. A Special School will be opened for the Deaf & Dumb and also Mentally Challenged. è Free 24-hour helpline for disabled persons will be set up. è A Special Window for physically challenged will be created in all Suvida Centres, Bus Stands, Hospitals etc. è The Right of Persons With Disability Act, 2016, passed by GOI will be implemented by the AAP Government in letter and spirit. AAM AADMI PARTY 24 ADVOCATES è New chambers will be constructed in all Bar Complexes on war footing to ease problem of advocates. è Financial Aid of Rs 5000/ per month will be provided for fresh eligible advocates. MEDIA è AAP government will formulate a media policy to allow fair and free media in Punjab. è Pension scheme for all media correspondents. Media centres with free Wi-ﬁ in all district and sub divisional headquarters. è No toll tax for accredited correspondents and free travel. NRIs è To protect property of NRIs back home, the word NRI will be entered with the name of the owner in ownership revenue record /Farad. Property transfer or any agreement deed regarding property bearing NRI will be entered in revenue records only with permission of Deputy Commissioner. è Any possession of property bearing NRI in revenue record by non NRI will be vacated by SSP within 15 days . è NRIs will be made stake holders in the development works in villages and will be consulted on developmental activities of their villages. è AAP government will press the central government for review of the black list of NRIs to start a new chepter in Punjab. è NRI Board will be formed with 24 hour hotline facility to solve all problems faced by NRIs, including VISA problems. AAM AADMI PARTY 26 1984 ANTI SIKH VIOLENCE VICTIMS è Victims' families who have not been given ﬁnancial assistance will be paid Rs 5 lakh. è Victims' families will be provided aﬀordable housing. è Victims families will be provided guarantee free loans for setting up businesses. MINORITIES è All members of the OBC community and minorities like Muslims & Christians who are homeless will be provided with houses. è Adequate space for burial grounds will be provided for Muslim and Christian communities wherever needed. HUMAN RIGHTS è People's Police Complaint committees in every district for participatory policing. è CCTV cameras in all police stations. è Punjab Human Rights Commission will be given more teeth by making its recommendations mandatory on the government. è Speciﬁc complaints into past violations of human rights will be investigated. ROAD SAFETY è A comprehensive Road safety policy and well equipped highway patrols. è Zero tolerance for drunken driving. è Five year maintenance contract will be part of road construction contracts. è All link roads in rural areas to be repaired in a time bound manner. è Free bus travel in private buses for all 25 Lac students who are free bus pass holders. AAM AADMI PARTY 27 ENVIRONMENT è All village ponds will be cleaned and Sewerage Treatment Plants will be installed on them. è Rivers' water will be protected from being polluted with waste of Himachal and Punjab industry. è Incentive will be provided to farmers adopting alternative ways for paddy straw instead of burning. è Punjab Pollution Control Board will be made corruption free. è Special arrangements will be made for sale of crops yielded through organic farming. All type of information and guidance for organic farming will be made available in agriculture department oﬃces. OTHERS è Separate SITs to probe each of the Chit Fund Scams in a time bound manner. The property of the guilty companies will be sold and money thus recovered will be given back to the depositors. è Property tax will be abolished and Domestic electricity rates up to 400 units will be halved. Pending House tax before 2013 will be charged as property tax after 2013. è Stipend of Rs 2000/ per month for Sarpanches and Rs.1000 for Panches will be provided. è The Paramedical Council of Punjab, Mohali will be recognised by the Punjab Department of Medical Education and Research. All paramedical study centres running in Punjab will be aﬃliated to the Council and regulated in accordance with norms. AAM AADMI PARTY 28 CHANDER SUTA DOGRA GURINDER SINGH BIRRING GAGANDEEP SINGH CHADHA DINESH CHADHA DR SARIKA VERMA MOHAMAD OVAIS RAJESH SHARMA
